Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Introduction The following discussion and analysis should be read together with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto.
Further, this report may contain material that includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 that reflect, when made, Nielsen’s current views with respect to current events and financial performance.
These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in “Item 1A.
Risk Factors.” Statements, other than those based on historical facts, which address activities, events or developments that we expect or anticipate may occur in the future are forward-looking statements.
Such forward-looking statements are and will be, as the case may be, subject to many risks, uncertainties and factors relating to Nielsen’s operations and business environment that may cause actual results to be materially different from any future results, express or implied, by such forward-looking statements.
See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The terms “Company,” “Nielsen,” “we,” “our” or “us,” as used herein, refer to Nielsen Holdings plc and each of its consolidated subsidiaries unless otherwise stated or indicated by context.
Background and Executive Summary We are a leading global measurement and data analytics company that provides the most complete and trusted view available of consumers and markets worldwide.
Our approach marries our proprietary data with other data sources to help clients around the world understand what’s happening now, what’s happening next, and how to best act on this knowledge.
An S&P 500 company, we have operations in over 90 countries, including many emerging markets, covering approximately 80% of the world’s population, and hold leading market positions in many of our services and geographies.
We believe that important measures of our results of operations include revenue, operating income/(loss) and Adjusted EBITDA (defined below).
Our long-term financial objectives include consistent revenue growth and expanding operating margins.
Accordingly, we are focused on geographic market and service offering expansion to drive revenue growth and improve operating efficiencies, including effective resource utilization, information technology leverage and overhead cost management.
Our business strategy is built upon a model that has traditionally yielded consistent revenue performance.
Typically, before the start of each year, more than 70% of our annual revenue has been committed under contracts in our combined Nielsen Global Connect and Nielsen Global Media segments, which provides us with a greater degree of stability for our revenue and allows us to more effectively manage our profitability and cash flows.
See “Business Segment Overview” below for further discussion.
We continue to look for growth opportunities through global expansion, specifically within emerging markets, as well as through the cross-platform expansion of our analytical services and measurement services.
On October 31, 2020, we entered into an agreement to sell our Global Connect business to Advent for $2.7 billion in cash, subject to adjustments based on closing levels of cash, indebtedness, debt-like items, working capital, and a warrant to purchase equity interests in the company that will own the Global Connect business (the “Warrant”).
On February 11, 2021, our shareholders approved the Transaction.
The Transaction was unanimously approved by the Board.
The Transaction is subject to regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions; and the Proposed Connect Transaction is expected to close in the next 90 days.
For further discussion regarding the potential risks relating to the Proposed Connect Transaction on the Company, see “Item 1A—Risk Factors- Risks Related to the Pending Sale of our Connect Business”.
Our restructuring and other productivity initiatives have been focused on a combination of improving operating leverage through targeted cost-reduction programs, business process improvements and portfolio restructuring actions, while at the same time investing in key programs to enhance future growth opportunities.
On June 30, 2020, we announced a broad-based optimization plan (the “Restructuring Plan”) to drive permanent cost savings and operational efficiencies, as well as to position us for greater profitability and growth.
The Restructuring Plan was substantially completed in 2020 and we expect restructuring actions and other permanent cost-savings initiatives to drive approximately $250 million in pre-tax annual run-rate savings.
Pre-tax restructuring charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $144 million.
Achieving our business objectives requires us to manage a number of key risk areas.
Our growth objective of geographic market and service expansion requires us to maintain the consistency and integrity of our information and underlying processes on a global scale, and to invest effectively our capital in technology and infrastructure to keep pace with our clients’ demands and our competitors.
Core to managing these key risk areas is our commitment to data privacy and security as it drives our ability to deliver quality insights for our clients in line with evolving regulatory requirements and governing standards across all the geographies and industries in which we operate.
Our operating footprint in over 90 countries requires disciplined global and local resource 38 management of internal and third party providers to ensure success.
In addition, our high level of indebtedness requires active management of our debt profile, with a focus on underlying maturities, interest rate risk, liquidity and operating cash flows.
COVID-19 Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic 

In March 2020, the global outbreak of the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) was categorized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization and has negatively affected the global economy, disrupted global supply chains, resulted in significant travel and transport restrictions, including mandated closures and orders to “shelter-in-place,” and created significant disruption of the financial markets.
We have established a global task force to ensure execution of our key priorities during the COVID-19 pandemic-- the health and safety of our global workforce, maintaining our financial position with ample liquidity, and continuity of critical business processes.
Employees 

We have taken measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, their families and our clients, with a large majority of our worldwide workforce working from home.
We halted in-person store field research and in-person client engagements in all markets at the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic and only began to reinstitute those activities after adopting processes with innovative solutions and the proper protections in place for our associates.
Business & Operations 

We have implemented business continuity plans designed to minimize potential business disruption from the COVID-19 pandemic and to protect our data input operations, infrastructure, and ability to meet customer demands.
Sales and Customer Demand 

We continue to face increased pressure in both Nielsen Global Media and Nielsen Global Connect.
For Nielsen Global Media, this pressure was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on sports, auto, and non-contracted revenue.
For Nielsen Global Media, the health of our consumer panels which are a very important source of measurement data have and will continue to be impacted because our field workers are constrained from their activities relating to recruiting, metering and monitoring the panelist homes.
For Nielsen Global Connect, this was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on retail measurement services in markets that are heavy in traditional trade as well as pressures on custom insights and physical work conducted in stores innovation.
These pressures are expected to continue, primarily due to non-contracted revenues in both Nielsen Global Media and Nielsen Global Connect.
Liquidity and Balance Sheet 

We believe we have a sound plan in place to mitigate the financial impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in the face of ongoing economic uncertainty.
We have taken aggressive cost actions to date and continue to closely monitor the situation.
We remain well- capitalized, have sufficient liquidity to satisfy our cash needs and will take additional actions as required.
On October 31, 2020, we entered into an agreement to sell our Global Connect business to Advent for $2.7 billion in cash, subject to adjustments based on closing levels of cash, indebtedness, debt-like items and working capital, and the Warrant.
The Transaction was unanimously approved by the Board.
On February 11, 2021, our shareholder’s approved the Transaction.
The Transaction is subject to regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions; and the Proposed Connect Transaction is expected to close in the next 90 days.
Community
 

In response to COVID-19, Nielsen launched a virtual volunteering campaign called “In It Together” to encourage our employees to volunteer safely and virtually in three ways: helping our neighbors, fighting hunger, and using our skills and expertise.
Each year, Nielsen associates can dedicate up to 24 hours to volunteering.
With stay-at-home orders around the world, through “In It Together,” associates can still use those 24 hours virtually.
Many associates have stepped up to help with needs that have emerged since the COVID-19 crisis began—everything from making masks for local frontline workers to analyzing food pantry data to help food banks meet growing demand.
Nielsen also continues to dedicate $10 million in pro bono work, skills-based volunteering and in-kind giving of our data and services each year.
For example, using our data, we worked with several governments to understand how COVID-19 food shortages have affected different geographies and supply chains.
39 
 On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The CARES Act, among other things, contains modifications on the limitation of business interest for tax years beginning in 2019 and 2020.
The modifications to Section 163(j) increase the allowable business interest deduction from 30% of adjusted taxable income to 50% of adjusted taxable income.
This modification significantly increases the allowable interest expense deduction of the Company and resulted in significantly less taxable income for the year-ended 2019, resulting in less utilization of net operating losses and foreign tax credits in that year.
In addition, the CARES Act permits NOL carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021.
The impact of those provisions was reflected in the first quarter of 2020.
For further discussion regarding the potential impacts of COVID-19 and related economic conditions on the Company, see "Item 1A—Risk Factors."
Business Segment Overview We are divided into business units: Nielsen Global Media (“Media”) and Nielsen Global Connect (“Connect”).
Media provides media and advertising clients with unbiased and reliable metrics that create the shared understanding of the industry required for markets to function, enabling its clients to grow and succeed across the $600 billion global advertising market.
Media helps clients to define exactly who they want to reach, as well as optimize the outcomes they can achieve.
Our cross-platform measurement strategy brings together the best of TV and digital measurement to ensure a more functional marketplace for the industry.
Connect provides consumer packaged goods manufacturers and retailers with accurate, actionable information and a complete picture of the complex and changing marketplace that brands need to innovate and grow their businesses.
Connect provides data and builds tools that use predictive models to turn observations in the marketplace into business decisions and winning solutions.
The business's data and insights, combined with the only open, cloud native measurement and analytics platform that democratizes the power of data, continue to provide an essential foundation that makes markets possible in the rapidly evolving world of commerce.
Certain corporate costs, other than those described above, including those related to selling, finance, legal, human resources, and information technology systems, are considered operating costs and are allocated to our segments based on either the actual amount of costs incurred or on a basis consistent with the operations of the underlying segment.
Critical Accounting Policies The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”).
The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
The most significant of these policies relate to: revenue recognition; business combinations including purchase price allocations; accruals for pension costs and other post-retirement benefits; accounting for income taxes; and valuation of long-lived assets including goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, computer software and share-based compensation.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the valuation of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
We evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis.
Actual results could vary from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
For a summary of the significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policies discussed below, see Note 1 – “Description of Business, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies” – to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition On January 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, using the modified retrospective method.
The ASC has been applied to all contracts as of the date of adoption.
There was no impact on our financial statements as a result of this adoption.
Revenue is measured based on the consideration specified in a contract with a customer.
We recognize revenue when it satisfies a performance obligation by transferring control of a product or service to a customer, which generally occurs over time.
Substantially all of our customer contracts are non-cancelable and non-refundable.
40 The following is a description of principal activities, by reportable segment, from which we generate revenues.
Revenue from the Connect segment consists primarily of measurement services, which include our core tracking and scan data (primarily transactional measurement data and consumer behavior information) to businesses in the consumer packaged goods industry.
Our data is used by its clients to measure their market share, tracking billions of sales transactions per month in retail outlets around the world.
Revenues for these services are recognized over the period during which the performance obligations are satisfied as the customer receives and consumes the benefits provided by us and control of the services are transferred to the customer.
We also provide consumer intelligence and analytical services that help clients make smarter business decisions throughout their product development and marketing cycles.
Our performance under these arrangements do not create an asset with an alternative use to us and generally include an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date, as such, revenue for these services is typically recognized over time.
Revenue for contracts that do not include an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date is recognized at a point in time when the performance obligation is satisfied, generally upon delivery of the services, and when control of the service is transferred to the customer.
Revenue from our Media segment is primarily generated from television, radio, digital and mobile audience measurement services and analytics which are used by our media clients to establish the value of airtime and more effectively schedule and promote their programming and our advertising clients to plan and optimize their spending.
As the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided by our performance, revenues for these services are recognized over the period during which the performance obligations are satisfied and control of the service is transferred to the customer.
We enter into cooperation arrangements with certain customers, under which the customer provides us with its data in exchange for our services.
We record these transactions at fair value, which is determined based on the fair value of goods or services received, if reasonably estimable.
If not reasonably estimable, we consider the fair value of the goods or services surrendered.
Share-based Compensation Expense Recognition Our share-based compensation programs are comprised of stock options, performance-based stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and performance restricted stock units.
We measure the cost of all share-based payments, including stock options, at fair value on the grant date and recognize such costs within the consolidated statements of operations.
We recognize expense associated with share-based payments that vest upon a single date using the straight-line method.
For those that vest over time, an accelerated graded vesting is used.
We recorded $53 million, $50 million and $35 million of expense associated with share-based compensation for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate grant date fair value of all outstanding vested and unvested options was $17 million and $1 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate grant date fair value of all outstanding vested and unvested performance stock options was $2 million and $2 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, the following amounts of unearned share-based compensation (net of estimated forfeitures) are expected to be recognized: approximately zero related to stock options over the next year, approximately $1 million related to performance stock options over the next three years, approximately $28 million related to unvested RSUs over a weighted average period of 2.3 years and approximately $4 million related to performance restricted stock units over the next two years.
41 Fair Value Measurement Determining the fair value of share-based awards at the grant date requires considerable judgment.
Share-based compensation expense for time-based stock options is primarily based on the estimated grant date fair value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which considers factors such as estimating the expected term of stock options, expected volatility of our stock, and the number of share-based awards expected to be forfeited due to future terminations.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, there were no time-based only stock options issued.
Some of the critical assumptions used in estimating the grant date fair value are presented in the table below: Year Ended December 31, 2018 Expected life (years) 6.00 Risk-free interest rate 2.87 % Expected dividend yield 4.97 % Expected volatility 25.96 % Weighted-average volatility 25.96 % Under the Nielsen Stock Incentive Plan, we granted 200,000, zero and 2,524,176 time and performance based stock options to purchase shares during the three years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Share-based compensation expense for the time and performance based stock options is based on the Monte Carlo simulation model which considers factors such as estimating the expected term of stock options, expected volatility of our stock, and the number of share-based awards expected to be forfeited due to future terminations.
Some of the critical assumptions used in estimating the grant date fair value are presented in the table below: Year Ended December 31, 2020 2019 2018 Expected life (years) 5.00 — 5.00 Risk-free interest rate 0.49-1.34 % — 2.83-2.92 % Expected dividend yield 1.16-1.62 % — 4.85- 5.54 % Expected volatility 28.99-31.40 % — 27.11-27.27 % Weighted average volatility 30.20 % — 27.13 % We consider the historical option exercise behavior of our employees in estimating the expected life of our options granted, which we believe are representative of future behavior.
For 2020 and 2018, expected volatility was based on our historical volatility.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, there were no time and performance based stock options issued.
In addition, for share-based awards where vesting is dependent upon achieving certain operating performance goals, we estimate the likelihood of achieving the performance goals.
For the performance restricted stock units granted in 2020, the total number of performance restricted stock units to be earned is subject to achievement of cumulative performance goals for the period ending December 31, 2020.
For the performance restricted stock units granted in 2019, the total number of performance restricted stock units to be earned is subject to achievement of cumulative performance goals for the two year period ending December 31, 2020.
For the performance restricted stock units granted in 2018, the total number of performance restricted stock units to be earned is subject to achievement of cumulative performance goals for the three year period ending December 31, 2020.
For the 2020 award, fifty percent of the target award was determined based on our revenue target and fifty percent of the award was determined based on adjusted earnings per share achievements.
Our revenue target was not achieved and fifty percent of the adjusted earnings per share targets were achieved.
For the 2019 award, fifty percent of the target award was determined based on our revenue compounded annual growth rate achievements and fifty percent of the award was determined based on adjusted earnings per share achievements.
Our revenue compounded annual growth rate target was not achieved and the adjusted earnings per share target was achieved.
There is a relative total shareholder return modifier that can increase or decrease the payout.
For the 2018 award, twenty five percent of the target award was determined based on our revenue compounded annual growth rate achievements, twenty five percent of the target award was based on our relative total shareholder return and fifty percent of the award was determined based on free cash flow achievements.
None of the targets for the 2018 awards were achieved.
The fair value of the target award related to free cash flow was 42 the fair value on the date of the grant, and the fair value of the target awards related to relative shareholder return was based on the Monte Carlo model.
The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based awards represent our best estimates and, although we believe them to be reasonable, these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment.
If factors change and we employ different assumptions in the application of our option-pricing model in future periods or if we experience different forfeiture rates, the compensation expense that is derived may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current year.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include cash and short-term, highly liquid investments with an original maturity date of three months or less.
Cash and cash equivalents are carried at fair value.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are stated at historical cost less accumulated impairment losses, if any.
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets, consisting of certain trade names and trademarks, are each tested for impairment on an annual basis and whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such asset may not be recoverable.
We review the recoverability of our goodwill by comparing the estimated fair values of reporting units with their respective carrying amounts.
We have designated October 1st as the date in which the annual assessment is performed as this timing corresponds with the development of the Company’s formal budget and business plan review.
We established, and continue to evaluate, our reporting units based on our internal reporting structure and define such reporting units at our operating segment level or one level below.
The estimates of fair value of a reporting unit are determined using a combination of valuation techniques, primarily by an income approach using a discounted cash flow analysis and supplemented by a market-based approach.
A discounted cash flow analysis requires the use of various assumptions, including expectations of future cash flows, growth rates, discount rates and tax rates in developing the present value of future cash flow projections.
Many of the factors used in assessing fair value are outside of the control of management, and these assumptions and estimates can change in future periods.
Changes in assumptions or estimates could materially affect the determination of the fair value of a reporting unit, and therefore could affect the amount of potential impairment.
The following assumptions are significant to our discounted cash flow analysis: • Business projections – expected future cash flows and growth rates are based on assumptions about the level of business activity in the marketplace as well as applicable cost levels that drive our budget and business plans.
The budget and business plans are updated at least annually and are frequently reviewed by management and our Board of Directors.
Actual results of operations, cash flows and other factors will likely differ from the estimates used in our valuation, and it is possible that differences and changes could be material.
A deterioration in profitability, adverse market conditions and a slower or weaker economic recovery than currently estimated by management could have a significant impact on the estimated fair value of our reporting units and could result in an impairment charge in the future.
Should such events or circumstances arise, management would evaluate other options available at that time that, if executed, could result in future profitability.
• Long-term growth rates – the assumed long-term growth rate representing the expected rate at which a reporting unit’s earnings stream, beyond that of the budget and business plan period, is projected to grow.
These rates are used to calculate the terminal value, or value at the end of the future earnings stream, of our reporting units, and are added to the cash flows projected for the budget and business plan period.
The long-term growth rate for each reporting unit is influenced by general market conditions as well as factors specific to the reporting unit such as the maturity of the underlying services.
The long-term growth rates we used for each of our reporting units in our 2020 evaluation were between 1.5% and 2.5%.
• Discount rates – the reporting unit’s combined future cash flows are discounted at a rate that is consistent with a weighted-average cost of capital that is likely to be used by market participants.
The weighted-average cost of capital is our estimate of the overall after-tax rate of return required by equity and debt holders of a business enterprise.
The discount rate for each reporting unit is influenced by general market conditions as well as factors specific to the reporting unit.
The discount rates we used in our 2020 evaluation of our reporting units were between 11.50% and 12.75%.
These estimates and assumptions vary between each reporting unit depending on the facts and circumstances specific to that unit.
We believe that the estimates and assumptions we made are reasonable, but they are susceptible to change from period to period.
43 We also use a market-based approach in estimating the fair value of our reporting units.
The market-based approach utilizes available market comparisons such as indicative industry multiples that are applied to current year revenue and earnings, next year’s revenue and earnings as well as recent comparable transactions.
To validate the reasonableness of the reporting unit fair values, we reconcile the aggregate fair values of our reporting units to our enterprise market capitalization.
Enterprise market capitalization includes, among other factors, the market value of our common stock and the appropriate redemption values of our debt.
During the first quarter of 2020, we determined that the significant decline in Nielsen’s market capitalization and impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic indicated that there was a triggering event for an interim assessment.
As a result of this, we performed an interim goodwill impairment analysis and determined that the estimated fair values of the reporting units exceeded their carrying values (including goodwill).
As such, there was no impairment.
There was no impairment or indicators of impairment noted in the October 1, 2020 assessment.
The fair values exceeded carrying values by more than 20% for each of our reporting units.
We perform sensitivity analyses on our assumptions, primarily around both long-term growth rate and discount rate assumptions.
Our sensitivity analyses include several combinations of reasonably possible scenarios with regard to these assumptions, including a one percent movement in both our long-term growth rate and discount rate assumptions.
When applying these sensitivity analyses, we noted that the fair value was greater than the carrying value for both of our reporting units.
While management believes that these sensitivity analyses provide a reasonable basis on which to evaluate the recovery of our goodwill, other facts or circumstances may arise that could impact the impairment assessment and therefore these analyses should not be used as a sole predictor of impairment.
The impairment test for other indefinite-lived intangible assets consists of a comparison of the fair value of the intangible asset with its carrying amount.
If the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess.
The estimates of fair value of trade names and trademarks are determined using a “relief from royalty” discounted cash flow valuation methodology.
Significant assumptions inherent in this methodology include estimates of royalty rates and discount rates.
Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the respective intangible assets.
Assumptions about royalty rates are based on the rates at which comparable trade names and trademarks are being licensed in the marketplace.
As a result of this analysis, we concluded that the fair value was less than the carrying amount for one of our indefinite-lived trade names and recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $88 million within the Connect reporting unit.
The impairment was primarily a result of change in market comparable data inputs utilized in establishing the discount rate, which resulted in a higher discount rate in the valuation, as well as slightly downward revisions of management’s forecasts of future revenues.
There was no impairment noted in any period presented with respect to the Company’s other indefinite-lived intangible assets.
Pension Costs We provide a number of retirement benefits to our employees, including defined benefit pension plans and post-retirement medical plans.
Pension costs, in respect of defined benefit pension plans, primarily represent the increase in the actuarial present value of the obligation for pension benefits based on employee service during the year and the interest on this obligation in respect of employee service in previous years, net of the expected return on plan assets.
Differences between this expected return and the actual return on these plan assets and actuarial changes are not recognized in the statement of operations, unless the accumulated differences and changes exceed a certain threshold.
The excess is amortized and charged to the statement of operations over, at the maximum, the average remaining term of employee service.
We recognize obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension plans as expenses in the statement of operations as they are incurred.
The determination of benefit obligations and expenses is based on actuarial models.
In order to measure benefit costs and obligations using these models, critical assumptions are made with regard to the discount rate, the expected return on plan assets and the assumed rate of compensation increases.
We provide retiree medical benefits to a limited number of participants in the U.S.
Therefore, retiree medical care cost trend rates are not a significant driver of our post retirement costs.
Management reviews these critical assumptions at least annually.
Other assumptions involve demographic factors such as turnover, retirement and mortality rates.
Management reviews these assumptions periodically and updates them as necessary.
The discount rate is the rate at which the benefit obligations could be effectively settled.
For our U.S. plans, the discount rate is based on a bond portfolio that includes only long-term bonds with an Aa rating, or equivalent, from a major rating agency.
For the non-U.S. plans, the discount rate is set by reference to market yields on high-quality corporate bonds.
We believe the timing and amount of cash flows related to the bonds in these portfolios are expected to match the estimated payment benefit streams of our plans.
44 To determine the expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets, we consider, for each country, the structure of the asset portfolio and the expected rates of return for each of the components.
For our U.S. plans, a 50 basis point decrease in the expected return on assets would increase pension expense on our principal plans by approximately $1 million per year.
We assumed that the weighted-averages of long-term returns on our pension plans were 4.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020, 4.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 4.4% for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The expected long-term rate of return is applied to the fair value of pension plan assets.
The actual return on plan assets will vary year to year from this assumption.
Although the actual return on plan assets will vary from year to year, it is appropriate to use long-term expected forecasts in selecting our expected return on plan assets.
As such, there can be no assurance that our actual return on plan assets will approximate the long-term expected forecasts.
During 2019, certain of our pension plans contracted with insurance companies and transferred $632 million of outstanding defined benefit pension obligations and related pension assets for approximately 6,000 retirees and beneficiaries in the Netherlands and UK to these insurance companies.
These insurance companies are now required to pay and administer the retirement benefits owed to these retirees and beneficiaries.
These transactions have no impact on the amount, timing, or form of the monthly retirement benefit payments to the covered retirees and beneficiaries.
These transactions resulted in a non-cash charge to other income/expense of $170 million in our consolidated statements of operations and did not impact cash flows in 2019.
Income Taxes We have a presence in more than 90 countries, and our effective tax rate is subject to significant variation due to several factors including variability in our pre-tax and taxable income or loss and the mix of jurisdictions to which they relate, intercompany transactions, the applicability of special tax regimes, changes in where or how we do business, acquisitions or dispositions, audit-related developments, and interpretations related to tax, including changes to the global tax framework, competition, and other laws and accounting rules in various jurisdictions.
Additionally, our effective tax rate can fluctuate based on the level of pre-tax income or loss.
For example, the impact of non-deductible expenses on our effective tax rate is greater when our pre-tax income is lower.
We have completed a number of material acquisitions and divestitures which have generated complex tax issues requiring management to use its judgment to make various tax determinations.
We have sought to organize the affairs of our subsidiaries in a tax efficient manner, taking into consideration the jurisdictions in which we operate.
Although we are confident that tax returns have been appropriately prepared and filed, there is risk that additional tax may be assessed on certain transactions or that the deductibility of certain expenditures may be disallowed for tax purposes.
Our policy is to estimate tax risk to the best of our ability and provide accordingly for those risks and take positions in which a high degree of confidence exists that the tax treatment will be accepted by the tax authorities.
The policy with respect to deferred taxation is to provide in full for temporary differences using the liability method.
Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are computed by assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes.
The carrying value of deferred tax assets is adjusted by a valuation allowance to the extent that these deferred tax assets are not considered to be realized on a more likely than not basis.
Realization of deferred tax assets is based, in part, on our judgment and various factors including reversal of deferred tax liabilities, our ability to generate future taxable income in jurisdictions where such assets have arisen and potential tax planning strategies.
Valuation allowances are recorded in order to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized in the future.
We record a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
Such tax positions are, based solely on their technical merits, more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities and reflect the largest amount of benefit, determined on a cumulative probability basis, which is more likely than not to be realized upon settlement with the applicable taxing authority with full knowledge of all relevant information.
We recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
Long-Lived Assets We are required to assess whether the value of our long-lived assets, including our buildings, improvements, technical and other equipment, and amortizable intangible assets have been impaired whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets might not be recoverable.
We do not perform a periodic assessment of assets for impairment in the absence of such information or indicators.
Conditions that would necessitate an impairment assessment include a significant decline in the observable market value of an asset, a significant change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used or a significant adverse change that would indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets is not recoverable.
Recoverability of assets that are held and used is measured by comparing the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows expected to be derived from an asset (or a group of assets) to their carrying value.
If the carrying value of the asset (or the group of assets) exceeds the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows, impairment is considered to exist.
If impairment is considered to exist based on undiscounted cash flows, the impairment charge is measured using an estimation of the assets’ fair value, typically using a discounted cash flow method.
The 45 identification of impairment indicators, the estimation of future cash flows and the determination of fair values for assets (or groups of assets) requires us to make significant judgments concerning the identification and validation of impairment indicators, expected cash flows and applicable discount rates.
These estimates are subject to revision as market conditions and our assessments change.
We capitalize software development costs with respect to major internal use software initiatives or enhancements.
The costs are capitalized from the time that the preliminary project stage is completed, and we consider it probable that the software will be used to perform the function intended until the time the software is placed in service for its intended use.
Once the software is placed in service, the capitalized costs are generally amortized over periods of three to seven years.
If events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of software may not be recovered, a recoverability analysis is performed based on estimated undiscounted cash flows to be generated from the software in the future.
If the analysis indicates that the carrying value is not recoverable from future cash flows, the software cost is written down to estimated fair value and an impairment is recognized.
These estimates are subject to revision as market conditions and as our assessments change.
The Company’s other long-lived asset impairment assessments resulted in the recognition of a non-cash impairment charge of $96 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
No impairment indicators were noted for other long-lived assets for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Factors Affecting Nielsen’s Financial Results Acquisitions, Dispositions and Investments in Affiliates Acquisitions For the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid cash consideration of $30 million associated with current period acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Had these 2020 acquisitions occurred as of January 1, 2020, the impact on our consolidated results of operations would not have been material.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we paid cash consideration of $61 million associated with current period acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Had these 2019 acquisitions occurred as of January 1, 2019, the impact on our consolidated results of operations would not have been material.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, we paid cash consideration of $43 million associated with both current period and previously executed acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Had these 2018 acquisitions occurred as of January 1, 2018, the impact on our consolidated results of operations would not have been material.
Foreign Currency Our financial results are reported in U.S. dollars and are therefore subject to the impact of movements in exchange rates on the translation of the financial information of individual businesses whose functional currencies are other than U.S. dollars.
Our principal foreign exchange revenue exposure is spread across several currencies, primarily the Euro.
The table below sets forth the profile of our revenue by principal currency.
Year endedDecember 31,2020 Year endedDecember 31,2019 Year endedDecember 31,2018 U.S. Dollar 59 % 58 % 57 % Euro 11 % 10 % 11 % Other Currencies 30 % 32 % 32 % Total 100 % 100 % 100 % As a result, fluctuations in the value of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar impact our operating results.
Impacts associated with fluctuations in foreign currency are discussed in more detail under “Item 7A.—Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk.” In countries with currencies other than the U.S. dollar, assets and liabilities are translated into U.S. dollars using end-of-period exchange rates; revenues, expenses and cash flows are translated using average rates of exchange.
The average U.S. dollar to Euro exchange rate was $1.14 to €1.00, $1.12 to €1.00 and $1.18 to €1.00 for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Constant currency growth rates used in the following discussion of results of operations eliminate the impact of year-over-year foreign currency fluctuations.
We evaluate our results of operations on both an as reported and a constant currency basis.
The constant currency presentation, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, excludes the impact of year-over-year fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
We 46 believe providing constant currency information provides valuable supplemental information regarding our results of operations, thereby facilitating period-to-period comparisons of our business performance and is consistent with how management evaluates the Company’s performance.
We calculate constant currency percentages by converting our prior-period local currency financial results using the current period exchange rates and comparing these adjusted amounts to our current period reported results.
This calculation may differ from similarly-titled measures used by others and, accordingly, the constant currency presentation is not meant to be a substitution for recorded amounts presented in conformity with GAAP nor should such amounts be considered in isolation.
Results of Operations – Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the amounts included in our consolidated statements of operations: Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 Revenues $ 6,290 $ 6,498 $ 6,515 Cost of revenues, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 2,760 2,822 2,805 Selling, general and administrative expenses, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 1,872 1,929 1,958 Depreciation and amortization 864 756 675 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets 184 1,004 1,413 Restructuring charges 144 80 139 Operating income/(loss) 466 (93 ) (475 ) Interest income 2 6 8 Interest expense (371 ) (397 ) (394 ) Foreign currency exchange transaction gains/(losses), net (9 ) (10 ) (16 ) Other income/(expense), net (14 ) (169 ) (5 ) Income/(loss) before income taxes and equity in net income/(loss) of affiliates 74 (663 ) (882 ) Benefit/(provision) for income taxes (67 ) 260 182 Net income/(loss) 7 (403 ) (700 ) Net income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests 13 12 12 Net income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders $ (6 ) $ (415 ) $ (712 ) Net Income to Adjusted EBITDA Reconciliation We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss from our consolidated statements of operations before interest income and expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, restructuring charges, impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets, share-based compensation expense and other non-operating items from our consolidated statements of operations as well as certain other items considered outside the normal course of our operations specifically described below.
Restructuring charges: We exclude restructuring expenses, which primarily include employee severance, office consolidation and contract termination charges, from our Adjusted EBITDA to allow more accurate comparisons of the financial results to historical operations and forward-looking guidance.
By excluding these expenses from our non-GAAP measures, we are better able to evaluate our ability to utilize our existing assets and estimate the long-term value these assets will generate for us.
Furthermore, we believe that the adjustments of these items more closely correlate with the sustainability of our operating performance.
Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets: We exclude the impact of charges related to the impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets.
Given the significance of the impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets, we reported it separately in the consolidated statements of operations.
We believe that the exclusion of these impairments, which are non-cash, allows for meaningful comparisons of operating results to peer companies.
We believe that this increases period-to-period comparability and is useful to evaluate the performance of the total company.
Share-based compensation expense: We exclude the impact of costs relating to share-based compensation.
Due to the subjective assumptions and a variety of award types, we believe that the exclusion of share-based compensation expense, which is typically non-cash, allows for more meaningful comparisons of our operating results to peer companies.
Share-based compensation expense can vary significantly based on the timing, size and nature of awards granted.
47 Other non-operating income/(expense), net: We exclude foreign currency exchange transaction gains and losses, primarily related to intercompany financing arrangements, as well as other non-operating income and expense items, such as gains and losses recorded on business combinations or dispositions, sales of investments, pension settlements, net income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests and early redemption payments made in connection with debt refinancing.
We believe that the adjustments of these items more closely correlate with the sustainability of our operating performance.
Other items: To measure operating performance, we exclude certain expenses and gains that arise outside the ordinary course of our operations.
Such costs primarily include legal settlements, acquisition related expenses, business optimization costs and other transactional costs.
We believe the exclusion of such amounts allows management and the users of the financial statements to better understand our financial results.
Separation-related costs: To measure operating performance, we exclude certain separation-related costs that would not have been incurred if we were not undertaking the separation of the Nielsen Global Connect business from the Nielsen Global Media business and positioning Global Connect and Global Media to operate as two independent companies.
These costs include: third-party advisor costs, tax friction, technology related spend, and incremental costs of beginning to operate as two independent companies.
We believe that exclusion of these costs will allow users of our financial statements to better understand our financial performance in 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a presentation made in accordance with GAAP, and our use of the term Adjusted EBITDA may vary from the use of similarly-titled measures by others in our industry due to the potential inconsistencies in the method of calculation and differences due to items subject to interpretation.
Adjusted EBITDA margin is Adjusted EBITDA for a particular period expressed as a percentage of revenues for that period.
We use Adjusted EBITDA to measure our performance from period to period both at the consolidated level as well as within our operating segments, to evaluate and fund incentive compensation programs and to compare our results to those of our competitors.
In addition to Adjusted EBITDA being a significant measure of performance for management purposes, we also believe that this presentation provides useful information to investors regarding financial and business trends related to our results of operations and that when non-GAAP financial information is viewed with GAAP financial information, investors are provided with a more meaningful understanding of our ongoing operating performance.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net income or loss, operating income/(loss), cash flows from operating activities or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP as measures of operating performance or cash flows as measures of liquidity.
Adjusted EBITDA has important limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
In addition, our definition of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies and may, therefore, have limitations as a comparative analytical tool.
The below table presents a reconciliation from net income/(loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018: Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 Net income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders $ (6 ) $ (415 ) $ (712 ) Interest expense, net 369 391 386 (Benefit)/provision for income taxes 67 (260 ) (182 ) Depreciation and amortization 864 756 675 EBITDA 1,294 472 167 Other non-operating (income)/expense, net(a) 36 191 33 Restructuring charges 144 80 139 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets 184 1,004 1,413 Share-based compensation expense 53 50 35 Separation-related costs(b) 123 - - Other items(c) 48 56 63 Adjusted EBITDA $ 1,882 $ 1,853 $ 1,850 (a) For the year ended December 31, 2019, other non-operating (income)/expense, net, included non-cash expenses of $170 million for pension settlements which included plan transfers to third parties in the Netherlands and UK, where we terminated our responsibility for future defined benefit obligations and transferred that responsibility to the third parties.
See Note 11 “Pensions and Other Post-Retirement Benefits” for more information.
48 (b) Separation-related costs consist of costs that would not have been incurred if we were not undertaking the separation of the Nielsen Global Connect business from the Nielsen Global Media business and positioning Global Connect and Global Media to operate as two independent companies.
(c) For the year ended December 31, 2020 other items primarily consists of business optimization costs and transaction related costs.
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 other items primarily consists of business optimization costs, including strategic review costs and transaction related costs.
Consolidated Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019 Revenues Revenues decreased 3.2% to $6,290 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $6,498 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, or a decrease of 2.3% on a constant currency basis.
Revenues within our Connect segment decreased 4.2%, or a decrease of 2.4% on a constant currency basis.
Revenues within our Media segment decreased 2.3% on a reported and constant currency basis.
Refer to the “Business Segment Results” section for further discussion of our revenue performance.
Cost of Revenues, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization Cost of revenues decreased 2.2% to $2,760 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $2,822 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, or a decrease of 1.4% on a constant currency basis.
Costs within our Connect segment decreased 3.6%, or a decrease of 2.4% on a constant currency basis, primarily due to temporary actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, our productivity initiatives and lower variable costs associated with lower revenues.
Costs within our Media segment increased 1.2%, or an increase of 1.3% on a constant currency basis, primarily due to the impact of our investments and higher spending on product portfolio management initiatives, partially offset by temporary actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and productivity initiatives.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 3.0% to $1,872 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1,929 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, or a decrease of 2.2% on a constant currency basis.
Costs within our Connect segment decreased 9.3%, or a decrease of 7.9% on a constant currency basis primarily due to temporary actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact of our optimization plan and other productivity initiatives.
Costs within our Media segment decreased 11.4% on a reported and constant currency basis.
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased on a constant currency basis primarily due to temporary actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact of our optimization plan and other productivity initiatives.
Costs within our Corporate segment increased 157.8% on a reported and constant currency basis, primarily due to separation-related costs relating to the separation of our Global Connect business from our Global Media business.
These costs include third-party advisor costs, technology and other similar costs associated with separating the businesses and operations.
Depreciation and Amortization Depreciation and amortization expense was $864 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $756 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
This increase was primarily due to higher depreciation and amortization expense associated with more assets in use, partially offset by lower depreciation and amortization expense associated with tangible and intangible assets acquired in business combinations.
Depreciation and amortization expense associated with tangible and intangibles assets acquired in business combinations decreased to $197 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $205 million for the year December 31, 2019.
49 Impairment of Goodwill and other Long-Lived Assets During 2020, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of other long-lived assets of $96 million of which $58 million was recorded within our Media segment and $38 million was recorded within our Connect segment related to management’s decision to exit certain smaller, underperforming markets and non-core businesses as well as a change in the extent to which certain self-developed software would be utilized.
We recorded a non-cash charge of $88 million within our Connect segment for the impairment of an indefinite-lived trade name related to our annual impairment testing.
During 2019, we recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $1,004 million.
This charge was recorded within our Connect reporting unit.
Restructuring Charges In June 2020, we announced a broad-based optimization plan to drive permanent cost savings and operational efficiencies, as well as to position us for greater profitability and growth.
The plan was substantially completed in 2020.
Cash payments for the severance costs will continue into late 2021.
We recorded $144 million in restructuring charges for the year ended December 31, 2020.
These charges primarily related to severance costs associated with employee separation packages.
We recorded $80 million in restructuring charges, primarily related to employee severance costs associated with our plans to reduce selling, general and administrative expenses and consolidate operations centers, as well as automation initiatives for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Income/(loss) Operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $466 million compared to operating loss of $93 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating loss within our Connect segment was $64 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to operating loss of $877 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating income within our Media segment decreased to $782 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $930 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Corporate operating expenses increased to $252 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $146 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense Interest expense was $371 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $397 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
This decrease was primarily due to slightly lower USD LIBOR interest rates on our senior secured term loans without hedged positions.
Foreign Currency Exchange Transaction Gains/(Losses), Net Foreign currency exchange transaction losses, net, represent the net loss on revaluation of certain cash, external debt, intercompany loans and other receivables and payables.
Fluctuations in the value of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. Dollar, particularly the Euro, have a significant effect on our operating results.
The average U.S. Dollar to Euro exchange rate was $1.14 to €1.00 and $1.12 to €1.00 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We realized net losses of $9 million and $10 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, resulting primarily from fluctuations in certain foreign currencies associated with intercompany transactions.
Other Income/(Expense), Net Other expense, net of $14 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily related to certain costs incurred in connection with our debt refinancing transactions, as well as the write-off of certain previously deferred financing fees in conjunction with the refinancing, certain non-service related pension costs, and loss from business disposition, partially offset by a gain on sale from equity method investments.
Other expense, net of $169 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to a non-cash expense of $170 million for pension settlements which included plan transfers to third parties in the Netherlands and UK, where we terminated our responsibility for future defined benefit obligations and transferred that responsibility to the third parties.
See Note 11 “Pensions and Other Post-Retirement Benefits” for more information.
50 Income/(Loss) Before Income Taxes and Equity in Net Income of Affiliates Income was $74 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a loss of $663 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due primarily to the consolidated results mentioned above.
Income Taxes The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 91% and 39%, respectively.
Our effective tax rate benefit of 91% for the year ended December 31, 2020 was higher than the UK statutory rate as a result of the impact of tax rate differences in other jurisdictions where the Company files tax returns, increases in valuation allowances, taxable transactions related to the separation, and withholding and foreign taxes as well as state and local income taxes offset by the favorable impact of changes in estimates for uncertain tax positions and audit settlements, research and development credits, and the effect of global licensing activities.
Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was higher than the UK statutory rate as a result of the impact of goodwill impairment, tax rate differences in other jurisdictions where the Company files tax returns, post-retirement settlements, and withholding and foreign taxes as well as state and local income taxes offset by the favorable impact of changes in estimates for uncertain tax positions and audit settlements, decreases in valuation allowances, the effect of global licensing activities, and certain financing activities.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had gross uncertain tax positions of $149 million and $164 million, respectively.
We also have accrued interest and penalties associated with these uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $26 million and $25 million, respectively.
Estimated interest and penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes is classified as a component of our provision or benefit for income taxes.
It is reasonably possible that within the next 12 months certain tax examinations will close, which could result in a change in unrecognized tax benefits, along with related interest and penalties.
Furthermore, the amounts ultimately paid may differ from the amounts accrued.
An estimate of any possible change cannot be made at this time.
Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries where statutory rates are lower and earnings being higher than anticipated in countries where statutory rates are higher, or by changes in tax laws, regulations, accounting principles, or interpretations thereof.
Other factors that may affect our effective income tax rate include, but are not limited to, losses in jurisdictions where no income tax benefit can be recognized, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, the establishment of valuation allowances against deferred income tax assets if we determined that it is more likely than not that future income tax benefits will not be realized, and audits by taxing authorities.
Adjusted EBITDA Adjusted EBITDA increased 1.6% to $1,882 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1,853 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, or an increase of 2.7% on a constant currency basis.
Our Adjusted EBITDA margin increased to 29.92% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 28.52% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
See “Results of Operations – Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018” for the reconciliation of net income/(loss) to Adjusted EBITDA.
Consolidated Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018 Revenues Revenues decreased 0.3% to $6,498 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $6,515 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, or an increase of 1.7% on a constant currency basis.
Revenues within our Connect segment decreased 2.6%, or an increase of 0.7% on a constant currency basis.
Revenues within our Media segment increased 1.9%, or an increase of 2.6% on a constant currency basis.
Refer to the “Business Segment Results” section for further discussion of our revenue performance.
Cost of Revenues, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization Cost of revenues increased 0.6% to $2,822 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $2,805 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, or an increase of 2.6% on a constant currency basis.
Costs within our Connect segment decreased 0.1%, or an increase of 2.9% on a constant currency basis, primarily due to global investments in our services, partially offset by our productivity initiatives.
51 Costs within our Media segment increased 0.5%, or an increase of 1.3% on a constant currency basis, primarily due to the impact of our investments and higher spending on product portfolio management initiatives, partially offset by productivity initiatives.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 1.5% to $1,929 for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $1,958 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, or an increase of 1.0% on a constant currency basis.
Costs within our Connect segment decreased 7.0%, or a decrease of 3.8% on a constant currency basis primarily due to productivity initiatives.
Costs within our Media segment increased 8.3%, or an increase of 9.7% on a constant currency basis.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased on a constant currency basis primarily due to the impact of our investments.
Depreciation and Amortization Depreciation and amortization expense was $756 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $675 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
This increase was primarily due to higher depreciation and amortization expense associated with capital expenditures, partially offset by lower depreciation and amortization expense associated with assets acquired in business combinations.
Depreciation and amortization expense associated with tangible and intangibles assets acquired in business combinations decreased to $205 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $220 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Impairment of Goodwill and other Long-Lived Assets During 2019, we recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $1,004 million.
This charge was recorded within our Connect reporting unit.
During 2018, we recorded an impairment of goodwill and other long-lived asset charge of $1,413 million, primarily related to a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $1,411 million.
This charge was recorded primarily within our Connect reporting unit.
Restructuring Charges We recorded $80 million and $139 million in restructuring charges, primarily related to employee severance costs associated with our plans to reduce selling, general and administrative expenses and consolidate operations centers, as well as automation initiatives for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Operating Income/(loss) Operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $93 million compared to operating loss of $475 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Operating loss within our Connect segment was $877 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to operating loss of $1,329 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Operating income within our Media segment decreased to $930 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $998 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Corporate operating expenses increased to $146 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $144 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Interest Expense Interest expense was $397 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $394 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
This increase was primarily due to slightly higher USD LIBOR interest rates on our senior secured term loans without hedged positions and a higher EURO denominated debt balance.
Foreign Currency Exchange Transaction Gains/(Losses), Net Foreign currency exchange transaction losses, net, represent the net loss on revaluation of certain cash, external debt, intercompany loans and other receivables and payables.
Fluctuations in the value of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. Dollar, particularly the Euro, have a significant effect on our operating results.
The average U.S. Dollar to Euro exchange rate was $1.12 to €1.00 and $1.18 to €1.00 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
52 We realized net losses of $10 million and $16 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, resulting primarily from fluctuations in certain foreign currencies associated with intercompany transactions.
Other Income/(Expense), Net Other expense, net of $169 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to a non-cash expense of $170 million for pension settlements which included plan transfers to third parties in the Netherlands and UK, where we terminated our responsibility for future defined benefit obligations and transferred that responsibility to the third parties.
See Note 11 “Pensions and Other Post-Retirement Benefits” for more information.
Other expense, net of $5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily related to certain costs incurred in connection with the September 2018 debt refinancing as well as the write-off of certain previously capitalized deferred financing fees in conjunction with the refinancing, partially offset by certain non-service related pension amounts.
Income/(Loss) Before Income Taxes and Equity in Net Income of Affiliates Loss was $663 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to a loss of $882 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 due primarily to the consolidated results mentioned above.
Income Taxes The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were 39% and 21%, respectively.
Our effective tax rate benefit of 39% for the year ended December 31, 2019 was higher than the UK statutory rate as a result of the impact of goodwill impairment, tax rate differences in other jurisdictions where the Company files tax returns, post-retirement settlements, and withholding and foreign taxes as well as state and local income taxes offset by the favorable impact of changes in estimates for uncertain tax positions and audit settlements, decreases in valuation allowances, the effect of global licensing activities, and certain financing activities.
Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2018 was higher than the UK statutory rate as a result of the impact of goodwill impairment, tax rate differences in other jurisdictions where the Company files tax returns, the effect of global licensing activities, withholding and foreign taxes as well as state and local income taxes, changes in estimates for uncertain tax positions, and increases in valuation allowances offset by the favorable impact of the TCJA adjustments, certain financing activities, and intercompany restructuring.
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, we had gross uncertain tax positions of $164 million and $572 million, respectively.
We also have accrued interest and penalties associated with these uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 of $25 million and $70 million, respectively.
Estimated interest and penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes is classified as a component of our provision or benefit for income taxes.
It is reasonably possible that within the next 12 months certain tax examinations will close, which could result in a change in unrecognized tax benefits, along with related interest and penalties.
Furthermore, the amounts ultimately paid may differ from the amounts accrued.
An estimate of any possible change cannot be made at this time.
Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries where statutory rates are lower and earnings being higher than anticipated in countries where statutory rates are higher, or by changes in tax laws, regulations, accounting principles, or interpretations thereof.
Other factors that may affect our effective income tax rate include, but are not limited to, losses in jurisdictions where no income tax benefit can be recognized, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, the establishment of valuation allowances against deferred income tax assets if we determined that it is more likely than not that future income tax benefits will not be realized, and audits by taxing authorities.
Adjusted EBITDA Adjusted EBITDA increased 0.2% to $1,853 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $1,850 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, or an increase of 1.4% on a constant currency basis.
Our Adjusted EBITDA margin increased to 28.52% for the year ended December 31, 2019 from 28.40% for the year ended December 31, 2018.
See “Results of Operations – Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018” for the reconciliation of net income/(loss) to Adjusted EBITDA.
53 Business Segment Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019 Revenues The table below sets forth our segment revenue performance data for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, both on an as-reported and constant currency basis.
(IN MILLIONS) Year EndedDecember 31,2020 Year EndedDecember 31,2019 % Variance2020 vs. 2019Reported Year EndedDecember 31,2019ConstantCurrency % Variance2020 vs. 2019Constant Currency Measure $ 2,073 $ 2,161 (4.1 )% $ 2,115 (2.0 )% Predict/Activate 856 896 (4.5 )% 886 (3.4 )% Connect Segment $ 2,929 $ 3,057 (4.2 )% $ 3,001 (2.4 )% Audience Measurement $ 2,455 $ 2,471 (0.6 )% $ 2,468 (0.5 )% Plan/Optimize 906 970 (6.6 )% 971 (6.7 )% Media Segment 3,361 3,441 (2.3 )% 3,439 (2.3 )% Total $ 6,290 $ 6,498 (3.2 )% $ 6,440 (2.3 )% Connect Segment Revenues Revenues decreased 4.2% to $2,929 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $3,057 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, or a decrease of 2.4% on a constant currency basis.
Revenues from Measure decreased 4.1% to $2,073 million, or a decrease of 2.0% on a constant currency basis, reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on retail measurement services.
Revenues from Predict/Activate decreased 4.5% to $856 million, or a decrease of 3.4% on a constant currency basis, reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in custom insights, partially offset by the January 2020 acquisition of Precima.
Media Segment Revenues Revenues decreased 2.3% to $3,361 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $3,441 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, or a decrease of 2.3% on a constant currency basis.
Revenues from Audience Measurement decreased 0.6%, or a decrease of 0.5% on a constant currency basis, reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on sports and non-contracted revenue and pressure in local television.
Plan/Optimize revenues decreased 6.6%, or a decrease of 6.7% on a constant currency basis, primarily reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on sports, Gracenote auto and short-cycle revenue.
54 Business Segment Profitability We do not allocate items below operating income/(loss) to our business segments and therefore the tables below set forth a reconciliation of operating income/(loss) at the business segment level for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, adjusting for certain items affecting operating income/(loss), such as restructuring charges, depreciation and amortization, impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets, share-based compensation expense and certain other items described below resulting in a presentation of our non-GAAP business segment profitability.
Non-GAAP business segment profitability provides useful supplemental information to management and investors regarding financial and business trends related to our results of operations.
When this non-GAAP financial information is viewed with our GAAP financial information, investors are provided with a meaningful understanding of our ongoing operating performance.
It is important to note that the non-GAAP business segment profitability corresponds in total to our consolidated Adjusted EBITDA described within our consolidated results of operations above, which our chief operating decision maker and other members of management use to measure our performance from period to period both at the consolidated level as well as within our operating segments, to evaluate and fund incentive compensation programs and to compare our results to those of our competitors.
These non-GAAP measures should not be considered as an alternative to net income/(loss), operating income/(loss), cash flows from operating activities or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP as measures of operating performance or cash flows as measures of liquidity.
These non-GAAP measures may differ from similarly-titled measures used by others and have important limitations as analytical tools.
Accordingly, they should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
(IN MILLIONS) Connect Media Corporate Total Year Ended December 31, 2020 Operating income/(loss) $ (64 ) $ 782 $ (252 ) $ 466 Depreciation and amortization 267 589 8 864 Impairment of goodwill other long-lived assets 126 58 — 184 Restructuring charges 107 26 11 144 Share-based compensation expense 15 15 23 53 Separation-related costs(1) 2 3 118 123 Other items(2) 1 1 46 48 Non-GAAP Business segment income/(loss) $ 454 $ 1,474 $ (46 ) $ 1,882 (IN MILLIONS) Connect Media Corporate Total Year Ended December 31, 2019 Operating income/(loss) $ (877 ) $ 930 $ (146 ) $ (93 ) Depreciation and amortization 231 518 7 756 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets 1,004 — — 1,004 Restructuring charges 49 15 16 80 Share-based compensation expense 15 13 22 50 Other items(2) — — 56 56 Non-GAAP Business segment income/(loss) $ 422 $ 1,476 $ (45 ) $ 1,853 (1) Separation-related costs consist of costs that would not have been incurred if we were not undertaking the separation of the Nielsen Global Connect business from the Nielsen Global Media business and positioning Global Connect and Global Media to operate as two independent companies.
(2) Other Items primarily consists of business optimization costs and transaction related costs for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, other items primarily consists of business optimization costs, including strategic review costs and transaction related costs.
55 (IN MILLIONS) Year EndedDecember 31,2020 Year EndedDecember 31,2019 % Variance2020 vs. 2019Reported Year EndedDecember 31, 2019Constant Currency % Variance2020 vs. 2019Constant Currency Non-GAAP Business Segment Income/(Loss) Connect $ 454 $ 422 7.6 % $ 402 12.9 % Media 1,474 1,476 (0.1 )% 1,476 (0.1 )% Corporate and Eliminations (46 ) (45 ) NA (46 ) NA Total Nielsen $ 1,882 $ 1,853 1.6 % $ 1,832 2.7 % Connect Segment Profitability Operating loss was $64 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to operating loss of $877 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase was primarily driven by the goodwill impairment for the year ended December 31, 2019, partially offset by the revenue decrease due to the COVID-19 pandemic discussed above, higher restructuring charges, higher depreciation and amortization expense and the impairment of other long-lived assets for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP business segment income increased 12.9% on a constant currency basis.
Media Segment Profitability Operating income was $782 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $930 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The decrease was driven primarily by the revenue decrease due to the COVID-19 pandemic discussed above, higher depreciation and amortization expense, higher restructuring charges and the impairment of other long-lived assets for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP business segment income decreased 0.1% on a constant currency basis.
Corporate Expenses and Eliminations Operating expenses were $252 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $146 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase was driven primarily by separation-related costs for the year ended December 31, 2020.
 Business Segment Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018 Revenues The table below sets forth our segment revenue performance data for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, both on an as-reported and constant currency basis.
(IN MILLIONS) Year EndedDecember 31,2019 Year EndedDecember 31,2018 % Variance2019 vs. 2018Reported Year EndedDecember 31,2018ConstantCurrency % Variance2019 vs. 2018Constant Currency Measure $ 2,161 $ 2,211 (2.3 )% $ 2,131 1.4 % Predict/Activate 896 927 (3.3 )% 904 (0.9 )% Connect Segment $ 3,057 $ 3,138 (2.6 )% $ 3,035 0.7 % Audience Measurement $ 2,471 $ 2,411 2.5 % $ 2,399 3.0 % Plan/Optimize 970 966 0.4 % 955 1.6 % Media Segment 3,441 3,377 1.9 % 3,354 2.6 % Total $ 6,498 $ 6,515 (0.3 )% $ 6,389 1.7 % Connect Segment Revenues Revenues decreased 2.6% to $3,057 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $3,138 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, or an increase of 0.7% on a constant currency basis.
Revenues from Measure decreased 2.3% to $2,161 million, or an increase of 1.4% on a constant currency basis.
Revenue growth on a constant currency basis was driven by stronger performance in our retail measurement services and improved trends in Emerging Markets.
Revenues from Predict/Activate decreased 3.3% to 56 $896 million, or a decrease of 0.9% on a constant currency basis.
Revenues decreased as a result of pressure in innovation and custom insights, partially offset by improvement in custom analytics.
Media Segment Revenues Revenues increased 1.9% to $3,441 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $3,377 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, or an increase of 2.6% on a constant currency basis.
Revenue growth was primarily driven by growth in Audience Measurement, which increased 2.5%, or an increase of 3.0% on a constant currency basis, primarily due to continued client adoption of our Total Audience Measurement system, partly offset by pressure in local television measurement.
Plan/Optimize revenues increased 0.4%, or an increase of 1.6% on a constant currency basis, primarily driven by growth in Gracenote and outcome-based solutions, partially offset by pressure in Telecom.
Business Segment Profitability We do not allocate items below operating income/(loss) to our business segments and therefore the tables below set forth a reconciliation of operating income/(loss) at the business segment level for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, adjusting for certain items affecting operating income/(loss), such as restructuring charges, depreciation and amortization, impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets, share-based compensation expense and certain other items described below resulting in a presentation of our non-GAAP business segment profitability.
Non-GAAP business segment profitability provides useful supplemental information to management and investors regarding financial and business trends related to our results of operations.
When this non-GAAP financial information is viewed with our GAAP financial information, investors are provided with a meaningful understanding of our ongoing operating performance.
It is important to note that the non-GAAP business segment profitability corresponds in total to our consolidated Adjusted EBITDA described within our consolidated results of operations above, which our chief operating decision maker and other members of management use to measure our performance from period to period both at the consolidated level as well as within our operating segments, to evaluate and fund incentive compensation programs and to compare our results to those of our competitors.
These non-GAAP measures should not be considered as an alternative to net income/(loss), operating income/(loss), cash flows from operating activities or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP as measures of operating performance or cash flows as measures of liquidity.
These non-GAAP measures may differ from similarly-titled measures used by others and have important limitations as analytical tools.
Accordingly, they should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
(IN MILLIONS) Connect Media Corporate Total Year Ended December 31, 2019 Operating income/(loss) $ (877 ) $ 930 $ (146 ) $ (93 ) Depreciation and amortization 231 518 7 756 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets 1,004 — — 1,004 Restructuring charges 49 15 16 80 Share-based compensation expense 15 13 22 50 Other items(1) — — 56 56 Non-GAAP Business segment income/(loss) $ 422 $ 1,476 $ (45 ) $ 1,853 (IN MILLIONS) Connect Media Corporate Total Year Ended December 31, 2018 Operating income/(loss) $ (1,329 ) $ 998 $ (144 ) $ (475 ) Depreciation and amortization 223 444 8 675 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets (1,411 ) — 2 (1,413 ) Restructuring charges 101 23 15 139 Share-based compensation expense 14 11 10 35 Other items(1) — — 63 63 Non-GAAP Business segment income/(loss) $ 420 $ 1,476 $ (46 ) $ 1,850 (1) For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 other items primarily consists of business optimization costs, including strategic review costs and transaction related costs.
57 (IN MILLIONS) Year EndedDecember 31,2019 Year EndedDecember 31,2018 % Variance2019 vs. 2018Reported Year EndedDecember 31, 2018Constant Currency % Variance2019 vs. 2018Constant Currency Non-GAAP Business Segment Income/(Loss) Connect $ 422 $ 420 0.5 % $ 402 5.0 % Media 1,476 1,476 0.0 % 1,470 0.4 % Corporate and Eliminations (45 ) (46 ) NA (45 ) NA Total Nielsen $ 1,853 $ 1,850 0.2 % $ 1,827 1.4 % Connect Segment Profitability Operating loss was $877 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to operating loss of $1,329 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The increase was primarily driven by lower goodwill impairment as compared to prior year and lower restructuring costs, partially offset by the revenue performance discussed above, higher depreciation and amortization expense and our continued global investments in our services, including retailer investments.
Non-GAAP business segment income increased 5.0% on a constant currency basis.
Media Segment Profitability Operating income was $930 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $998 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The decrease was driven by higher depreciation and amortization expense and investments in our services, partially offset by the revenue performance discussed above and lower restructuring costs.
Non-GAAP business segment income increased 0.4% on a constant currency basis.
Corporate Expenses and Eliminations Operating expenses were $146 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $144 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to an increase in share-based compensation expense, partially offset by lower business optimization costs and transaction related costs, lower depreciation and amortization expense and lower restructuring charges.
Liquidity and Capital Resources Cash flows from operations provided a source of funds of $999 million, $1,066 million and $1,058 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
This decrease in net cash provided in operating activities was primarily due to higher employee annual incentive payments and higher restructuring payments, partially offset by working capital timing and lower income tax payments and interest payments.
We provide additional liquidity through several sources including maintaining an adequate cash balance, access to global funding sources and a committed revolving credit facility.
The following table provides a summary of the major sources of liquidity for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018: (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 Net cash from operating activities $ 999 $ 1,066 $ 1,058 Cash and short-term marketable securities $ 610 $ 454 $ 524 Revolving credit facility $ 850 $ 850 $ 850 Of the $610 million in cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020, approximately $355 million was held in jurisdictions outside the U.S. We regularly review the amount of cash and cash equivalents held outside of the U.S. to determine the amounts necessary to fund the current operations of our foreign operations and their growth initiatives and amounts needed to service our U.S. indebtedness and related obligations.
58 The below table illustrates our weighted average interest rate and cash paid for interest over the last three years.
2020 2019 2018 Weighted average interest rate 4.02 % 4.40 % 4.67 % Cash paid for interest, net of amounts capitalized (in millions) $ 358 $ 386 $ 380 Our contractual obligations, commitments and debt service requirements over the next several years are significant.
We believe we will have available resources to meet both our short-term and long-term liquidity requirements, including our senior secured debt service.
We expect the cash flow from our operations, combined with existing cash and amounts available under the revolving credit facility, will provide sufficient liquidity to fund our current obligations, projected working capital requirements, restructuring obligations, dividend payments and capital spending over the next year.
In addition, we may, from time to time, purchase, repay, redeem or retire any of our outstanding debt securities (including any publicly issued debt securities) in privately negotiated or open market transactions, by tender offer or otherwise.
Long-term borrowings The following table provides a summary of our outstanding long-term borrowings as of December 31, 2020: Weighted Interest Carrying (IN MILLIONS) Rate Amount $1,125 million Senior secured term loan (LIBOR based variable rate of 1.90%) due 2023 $ 1,050 $2,303 million Senior secured term loan (LIBOR based variable rate of 2.15%) due 2023 2,239 €545 million Senior secured term loan (Euro LIBOR based variable rate of 2.50%) due 2023 359 €660 million Senior secured term loan (Euro LIBOR based variable rate of 3.75%) due 2025 789 $550 million Senior secured term loan (LIBOR based variable rate of 4.75%) due 2025 534 $850 million Senior secured revolving credit facility (Euro LIBOR or LIBOR based variable rate) due 2023 — Total senior secured credit facilities (with weighted-average interest rate) 2.95 % 4,971 $425 million 5.500% senior debenture loan due 2021 150 $2,300 million 5.000% senior debenture loan due 2022 824 $500 million 5.000% senior debenture loan due 2025 497 $1,000 million 5.625% senior debenture loan due 2028 985 $750 million 5.875% senior debenture loan due 2030 739 Total debenture loans (with weighted-average interest rate) 5.69 % 3,195 Other loans — Total long-term debt 4.02 % 8,166 Finance lease and other financing obligations 141 Total debt and other financing arrangements 8,307 Less: Current portion of long-term debt, finance lease and other financing obligations and other short-term borrowings 293 Non-current portion of long-term debt and finance lease and other financing obligations $ 8,014 Term Loan Facilities In June 2020, we entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) that provides for: (i) a new dollar term loan facility, the “Dollar Term B-5 Loans” having commitments in an aggregate principal amount of $550 million and (ii) a new euro term loan 59 facility, the “Euro Term B-3 Loans” in an aggregate principal amount of €420 million.
On June 4, 2020, we borrowed the full amount of the Dollar Term B-5 Loans and the Euro Term B-3 Loans.
The proceeds of the Dollar Term B-5 Loans and Euro Term B-3 Loans were used to redeem all of the $800 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of the 4.500% Notes due 2020 and redeem $200 million of the $625 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 5.500% Senior Notes due 2021.
The partial redemption of the 5.500% Notes resulted in $425 million aggregate principal amount of 2021 Notes remaining outstanding.
The Dollar Term B-5 Loans and the Euro Term B-3 Loans will mature in full on the earlier of (i) June 4, 2025 and (ii) if the existing Class B Term Loans incurred pursuant to and as defined in the Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of June 29, 2018 (the “Existing Credit Agreement”) have not been repaid or refinanced (subject to additional limitations in the Credit Agreement) on or prior to the date that is 91 days prior to October 4, 2023, on October 4, 2023.
The Dollar Term B-5 Loans bear interest at a rate per annum equal to, at the election of us, (i) a base rate or eurocurrency rate, plus (ii) an applicable margin of 2.75%, in the case of base rate loans, and 3.75%, in the case of eurocurrency rate loans.
The Euro Term B-3 Loans bear interest at a rate per annum equal to (i) a eurocurrency rate plus (ii) an applicable margin of 3.75%.
The Credit Agreement contains substantially the same affirmative and negative covenants as those of the Existing Credit Agreement, however, the Credit Agreement expressly permits actions in connection with and resulting in the disposition of Nielsen Global Connect, including by way of a spin-off of the Connect Business, as previously announced by us.
The obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured on a pari passu basis with the obligations under the Existing Credit Agreement.
We wrote-off certain previously deferred financing fees of $1 million associated with the June 2020 debt refinancing and capitalized certain fees in connection with the refinancing of $9 million.
In July, 2020, we entered into Amendment No.
1 (“Amendment No.
1”) to the Credit Agreement.
Pursuant to Amendment No.
1, we incurred new Euro Term B-3 Loans in an aggregate principal amount of €240 million (the “Incremental Euro Term B-3 Loans”), thereby increasing the outstanding amount of existing Euro Term B-3 Loans under the Credit Agreement, as amended by Amendment No.
1, to approximately €660 million.
The proceeds of the Incremental Euro Term B-3 Loans were used by us to prepay the €545 million Senior secured term loan due 2023 under the Existing Credit Agreement in an aggregate principal amount of €240 million and all accrued interest and expenses.
The Incremental Euro Term B-3 Loans are subject to the same terms, maturity date and interest rate as the existing Euro Term B-3 Loans.
The Incremental Euro Term B-3 Loans are subject to customary affirmative and negative covenants and events of default.
In July, 2020, we entered into the Sixth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Amendment Agreement”) amending and restating the Existing Credit Agreement.
The modifications in the agreement primarily conform the covenants and certain other terms to the terms of the Credit Agreement.
The Amendment Agreement expressly permits actions in connection with and resulting in the disposition of Nielsen Global Connect, including by way of a spin-off of the Connect Business, as previously announced by us.
We wrote-off certain previously deferred financing fees and incurred new fees as part of the July financings of $3 million and capitalized certain fees in connection with the July financings of $5 million.
Debenture Loans The indentures governing the Senior Notes limit the majority of our subsidiaries’ ability to incur additional indebtedness, pay dividends or make other distributions or repurchase its capital stock, make certain investments, enter into certain types of transactions with affiliates, use assets as security in other transactions and sell certain assets or merge with or into other companies subject to certain exceptions.
Upon a change in control, we are required under each indenture to make an offer to redeem all of the Senior Notes issued pursuant to such indenture at a redemption price equal to the 101% of the aggregate principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The Senior Notes are jointly and severally guaranteed by us, substantially all of our wholly owned material U.S. subsidiaries and certain of our non-U.S. wholly-owned subsidiaries.
In September, 2020, we issued $1 billion aggregate principal amount of 5.625% Senior Notes due 2028 (the “2028 Notes”), which mature on October 1, 2028 at par and $750 million aggregate principal amount of its 5.875% Senior Notes due 2030 (the “2030 Notes” and together with the 2028 Notes, the “Notes”), which mature on October 1, 2030 at par.
We capitalized certain fees in connection with the refinancing of $27 million.
60 We will pay interest on the 2028 Notes at a rate of 5.625% per annum and on the 2030 Notes at a rate of 5.875% per annum, in each case semiannually on the interest payment dates provided in the applicable indenture governing such series of Senior Notes.
Concurrent with this issuance we called for partial redemption of $275 million of the $425 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of the 5.500% Senior Notes due 2021 (the “2021 Notes”) effective October 9, 2020, $725 million of the $2,300 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of the 5.000% Senior Notes due 2022 (the “2022 Notes”) effective October 9, 2020 and $750 million of the $2,300 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes effective October 10, 2020, in each case at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of such notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon to, but excluding, the applicable partial redemption date.
We wrote-off certain previously deferred financing fees of $4 million in connection with the October 2020 redemptions.
Covenants The Amendment Agreement and the Credit Agreement, as amended by Amendment No.
1 (together the “Secured Credit Agreements”)contain a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict, subject to certain exceptions, the ability of Nielsen Holding and Finance B.V. and its restricted subsidiaries (which together constitute most of our subsidiaries) to incur additional indebtedness or guarantees, incur liens and engage in sale and leaseback transactions, make certain loans and investments, declare dividends, make payments or redeem or repurchase capital stock, engage in certain mergers, acquisitions and other business combinations, prepay, redeem or purchase certain indebtedness, amend or otherwise alter terms of certain indebtedness, sell certain assets, transact with affiliates, enter into agreements limiting subsidiary distributions and alter the business they conduct.
These entities are restricted, subject to certain exceptions, in their ability to transfer their net assets to us.
Such restricted net assets amounted to approximately $1.9 billion at December 31, 2020.
The Amendment Agreement contains a total leverage covenant that requires the Covenant Parties (as defined in the Amendment Agreement) maintain a ratio of Consolidated Total Net Debt (as defined in the Amendment Agreement) to Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the Amendment Agreement) at or below 5.50 to 1.00, measured at the end of each calendar quarter for the four quarters most recently ended.
Neither we nor TNC B.V. is currently bound by any financial or negative covenants contained in the Secured Credit Agreements.
The Secured Credit Agreements also contain certain customary affirmative covenants and events of default.
Certain significant financial covenants are described further below.
Failure to comply with the financial covenant described above would result in an event of default under our Amendment Agreement unless waived by certain of our term lenders and our revolving lenders.
An event of default under our Amendment Agreement can result in the acceleration of our indebtedness under the facilities thereunder, which in turn would result in an event of default and possible acceleration of indebtedness under the Credit Agreement, as amended by Amendment No.
1, and the agreements governing our debt securities as well.
As our failure to comply with the financial covenant described above can cause us to go into default under the agreements governing our indebtedness, management believes that our Amendment Agreement and this covenant are material to us.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in full compliance with the financial covenant described above.
Pursuant to the terms of our Secured Credit Agreements, we are subject to making mandatory prepayments on the term loans outstanding thereunder to the extent in any full calendar year we generate Excess Cash Flow (“ECF”), as defined in the Secured Credit Agreements.
The percentage of ECF that must be applied as a repayment under either Secured Credit Agreement is a function of several factors, including our ratio of total net debt to Covenant EBITDA, as well other adjustments, including any voluntary term loan repayments and permanent reductions of revolving credit commitments made in the course of the calendar year.
To the extent any mandatory repayment is required pursuant to this ECF clause; such payment must generally occur on or around the time of the delivery of the annual consolidated financial statements to the applicable lenders.
At December 31, 2020, our ratio of total net debt to Covenant EBITDA was less than 5.00 to 1.00 and therefore no mandatory repayment was required.
Our next ECF measurement date will occur upon completion of the 2021 results, and although we do not expect to be required to issue any mandatory repayments in 2021 or beyond, it is uncertain at this time if any such payments will be required in future periods.
Revolving Credit Facility The Amendment Agreement contains a senior secured revolving credit facility with aggregate revolving credit commitments of $850 million and a final maturity of July 2023 under which Nielsen Finance LLC, TNC (US) Holdings, Inc., and Nielsen Holding and Finance B.V. can borrow revolving loans.
The revolving credit facility can also be used for letters of credit, guarantees and swingline loans.
The senior secured revolving credit facility is provided under the Amendment Agreement and so contains covenants and restrictions as noted above with respect to the Amendment Agreement.
Obligations under the revolving credit facility are guaranteed by the same entities that guarantee obligations under the Amendment Agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, we had zero borrowings outstanding and outstanding letters of credit of $18 million.
As of December 31, 2019, we had zero borrowings outstanding and outstanding letters of credit of $17 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $832 million available for borrowing under the revolving credit facility.
61 Dividends and Share Repurchase Program We continue to drive shareholder value through our quarterly cash dividend policy which was adopted by our Board of Directors ("Board") in 2013.
Under this plan we have paid $86 million and $395 million in cash dividends during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
On November 3, 2019, the Board approved a plan to reduce the quarterly cash dividend, with the goal of strengthening our balance sheet and providing added flexibility to invest for growth.
Any decision to declare and pay dividends in the future will be made at the discretion of our Board and will be subject to the Board’s continuing determination that the dividend policy and the declaration of dividends thereunder are in the best interests of our shareholders, and are in compliance with all laws and agreements to which we are subject.
The below table summarizes the dividends declared on our common stock during 2019 and 2020.
Declaration Date Record Date Payment Date Dividend Per Share February 21, 2019 March 7, 2019 March 21, 2019 $ 0.35 April 18, 2019 June 5, 2019 June 19, 2019 $ 0.35 July 18, 2019 August 22, 2019 September 5, 2019 $ 0.35 November 3, 2019 November 21, 2019 December 5, 2019 $ 0.06 February 20, 2020 March 5, 2020 March 19, 2020 $ 0.06 April 16, 2020 June 4, 2020 June 18, 2020 $ 0.06 July 16, 2020 August 20, 2020 September 3, 2020 $ 0.06 October 27, 2020 November 19, 2020 December 3, 2020 $ 0.06 On February 4, 2021, our Board declared a cash dividend of $0.06 per share on our common stock.
The dividend is payable on March 18, 2021 to shareholders of record at the close of business on March 4, 2021.
Our Board approved a share repurchase program, as included in the below table, for up to $2 billion of our outstanding common stock.
The primary purpose of the program is to return value to shareholders and to mitigate dilution associated with our equity compensation plans.
Board Approval Share Repurchase Authorization ($ in millions) July 25, 2013 $ 500 October 23, 2014 1,000 December 11, 2015 500 Total Share Repurchase Authorization $ 2,000 Repurchases under this program will be made in accordance with applicable securities laws from time to time and depending on our evaluation of market conditions and other factors.
This program has been executed within the limitations of the authority granted us on August 6, 2015 and which has been extended by the authority approved by our shareholders at its annual general meeting held on May 12, 2020 (which authority will expire on May 12, 2025).
.
As of December 31, 2020, there have been 39,426,521 shares of our common stock purchased at an average price of $44.95 per share (total consideration of approximately $1,772 million) under this program.
There were no share repurchases for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows 2020 versus 2019 Operating activities.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $999 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1,066 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
This decrease in net cash provided in operating activities was primarily due to higher employee annual incentive payments and higher restructuring payments, partially offset by working capital timing and lower income tax payments and interest payments.
Our key collections performance measure, days billing outstanding (DBO), increased by 3 days as compared to the same period last year.
Investing activities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $537 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $582 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The primary drivers for the decrease was lower acquisition payments and a decrease in purchases of equity investments during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period for 2019.
62 Financing activities.
Net cash used in financing activities was $307 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $544 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The decrease in net cash used in financing activities was primarily due to the decrease in cash dividends, as described in “Dividends and Share Repurchase Program”, partially offset by the net proceeds from debt issuances and repayments compared to the same period for 2019.
Cash Flows 2019 versus 2018 Operating activities.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,066 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $1,058 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
This increase was driven primarily by lower employee annual incentive payments, lower retailer investments and lower restructuring payments, partially offset by working capital timing and higher interest and tax payments during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Our key collections performance measure, days billing outstanding (DBO), decreased by 3 days as compared to the same period last year.
Investing activities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $582 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $506 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The increase was primarily driven by increased acquisition payments, a decrease in proceeds received from the sale of subsidiaries and affiliates, and the purchase of an equity investment during the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to 2018. Financing activities.
Net cash used in financing activities was $544 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $676 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The decrease in cash used in financing activities was primarily due to lower dividend payments and share repurchasing, as described in the “Dividends and Share Repurchase Program” section above, partially offset by an increase in net payments from the repayment and issuance of debt during the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the same period of 2018.
Capital Expenditures Investments in property, plant, equipment, software and other assets totaled $519 million, $519 million and $520 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
In addition, the Company received zero, zero and $4 million of proceeds from the sale of certain property, plant and equipment and other assets during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Commitments and Contingencies Outsourced Services Agreements In July 2019, we amended our Second Amended and Restated Master Services Agreement (the “MSA”), dated as of October 1, 2017 and effective as of January 1, 2017 (the “Effective Date”), with Tata America International Corporation and Tata Consultancy Services Limited (jointly, “TCS”) by executing Amendment Number One (the “Amendment”) with TCS, dated as of July 1, 2019 and effective as of January 1, 2019 (the “Amendment Effective Date”).
The Amendment reduces the amount of services we have committed to purchase from TCS from the Amendment Effective Date through the remaining term of the MSA (the “Minimum Commitment”) to $1,413 billion, including a commitment to purchase at least $275 million in services during 2019, at least $250 million in services during 2020, $184.3 million in services per year from 2021 through 2024, and $137.8 million in services in 2025 (in each of the foregoing cases, the “Annual Commitment”).
TCS’s charges under existing and future statements of work (“SOW”) pursuant to the MSA will continue to be credited against the Minimum Commitment and the Annual Commitment and the occurrence of certain events, some of which also provide us with the right to terminate the Agreement or SOWs, as applicable, will continue to be available to reduce the Minimum and Annual Commitment Amounts as they occur.
The parties also agreed to certain other commercial terms.
However, the other material terms of the MSA as reflected in the MSA and as previously disclosed remain unchanged.
As of December 31, 2020, the remaining TCS commitment was approximately $875 million.
63 Other Contractual Obligations Our other contractual obligations include finance lease obligations (including interest portion), facility leases, leases of certain computer and other equipment, agreements to purchase data and telecommunication services, the payment of principal and interest on debt and pension fund obligations.
At December 31, 2020, the minimum annual payments under these agreements and other contracts that had initial or remaining non-cancelable terms in excess of one year are as listed in the following table.
Due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of future cash flows associated with our unrecognized tax positions at December 31, 2020, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the timing of any potential cash settlements with the respective taxing authorities.
Therefore, $175 million in uncertain tax positions (which includes interest and penalties of $26 million) have been excluded from the contractual obligations table below.
See Note 15 – “Income Taxes” – to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion on income taxes.
Payments due by period (IN MILLIONS) Total 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Thereafter Finance lease obligations(a) $ 152 $ 59 $ 43 $ 33 $ 11 $ 1 $ 5 Operating leases(b) 548 123 105 73 51 33 163 Other contractual obligations(c) 1,310 447 279 256 186 139 3 Long-term debt, including current portion(a) 8,166 224 915 3,486 10 1,793 1,738 Interest(d) 1,415 311 286 225 180 124 289 Pension fund obligations(e) 32 32 — — — — — Total $ 11,623 $ 1,196 $ 1,628 $ 4,073 $ 438 $ 2,090 $ 2,198 (a) Our short-term and long-term debt obligations are described in Note 12 – “Long-Term Debt and Other Financing Arrangements” and our short-term and long-term finance lease obligations are described in Note 5 “Leases”,– to our consolidated financial statements.
(b) Our operating lease obligations are described in Note 17 – “Commitments and Contingencies” – to our consolidated financial statements.
(c) Other contractual obligations represent obligations under agreements, which are not unilaterally cancelable by us, are legally enforceable and specify fixed or minimum amounts or quantities of goods or services at fixed or minimum prices.
We generally require purchase orders for vendor and third party spending.
The amounts presented above represent the minimum future annual services covered by purchase obligations including data processing, building maintenance, equipment purchasing, photocopiers, land and mobile telephone service, computer software and hardware maintenance, and outsourcing including cloud services.
Our remaining commitments as of December 31, 2020, under the outsourced services agreement with TCS have been included above based on the Annual Commitment minimum required payments.
As of December 31, 2020, the remaining TCS commitment was approximately $875 million.
(d) Interest payments consists of interest on both fixed-rate and variable-rate debt based on LIBOR as of December 31, 2020.
(e) Our contributions to pension and other post-retirement defined benefit plans were $37 million, $28 million and $29 million during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Future minimum pension and other post-retirement benefits contributions are not determinable for time periods after 2021.
See Note 11 – “Pensions and Other Post-Retirement Benefits” – to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion on plan obligations.
64 Guarantees and Other Contingent Commitments At December 31, 2020, we were committed under the following significant guarantee arrangements: Sub-lease guarantees.
We provide sub-lease guarantees in accordance with certain agreements pursuant to which we guarantee
 all rental payments upon default of rental payment by the sub-lessee.
To date, we have not been required to perform under such arrangements, and do not anticipate making any significant payments related to such guarantees and, accordingly, no amounts have been recorded.
Letters of credit.
Letters of credit issued and outstanding amount to $18 million at December 31, 2020.
Legal Proceedings and Contingencies In August 2018, a putative shareholder class action lawsuit was filed in the Southern District of New York, naming as defendants Nielsen, former Chief Executive Officer Dwight Mitchell Barns, and former Chief Financial Officer Jamere Jackson.
Another lawsuit, which alleged similar facts but also named other Nielsen officers, was filed in the Northern District of Illinois in September 2018 and transferred to the Southern District of New York in December 2018.
The actions were consolidated on April 22, 2019, and the Public Employees’ Retirement System of Mississippi was appointed lead plaintiff for the putative class.
The operative complaint was filed on September 27, 2019, and asserts violations of certain provisions of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, based on allegedly false and materially misleading statements relating to the outlook of our Buy (now “Connect”) segment, Our preparedness for changes in global data privacy laws and our reliance on third-party data.
We moved to dismiss the operative complaint on November 26, 2019.
On January 4, 2021, certain of the allegations against us and our officers were dismissed, while others were sustained.
Discovery is in its early stages and is ongoing.
In addition, in January 2019, a shareholder derivative lawsuit was filed in New York Supreme Court against a number of our current and former officers and directors.
The derivative lawsuit alleges that the named officers and directors breached their fiduciary duties to us in connection with factual assertions substantially similar to those in the putative class action complaint.
The derivative lawsuit further alleges that certain officers and directors engaged in trading our stock based on material, nonpublic information.
By agreement dated June 26, 2019, the derivative lawsuit was stayed pending resolution of our motion to dismiss the aforementioned securities litigation.
We anticipate an amended complaint will be filed in the coming months.
We intend to defend these lawsuits vigorously.
Based on currently available information, we believe that we have meritorious defenses to these actions and that their resolution is not likely to have a material adverse effect on our business, financial position, or results of operations.
As previously disclosed in the Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 1, 2021, five lawsuits were filed relating to the Proposed Connect Transaction in federal and state courts, including one purported class action lawsuit, by purported Nielsen shareholders against us and the members of our Board of Directors (collectively, the “Actions”).
The Actions generally alleged that the proxy statement filed by us in connection with the Transaction misrepresented and/or omitted certain purportedly material information and asserted violations of Sections 14(a) and 20(a) of the Exchange Act and the rules promulgated thereunder or negligent and fraudulent misrepresentation and concealment in violation of New York common law and breach of duty of disclosure under the laws of England and Wales.
The alleged material misstatements and omissions related to, among other topics, certain forecasted financial information for the Global Connect business prepared by our management, the opinion of J.P. Morgan Securities LLC (“J.P.
Morgan”), our financial advisor, in connection with the Proposed Connect Transaction, the interests of our directors and officers in the Transaction and certain background events that occurred in connection with the Proposed Connect Transaction.
The plaintiffs in each of the Actions sought, among other things, an injunction against the consummation of the Transaction or, in the alternative, rescission damages, as well as an award of costs and expenses (including attorneys’ and experts’ fees and expenses).
On February 1, 2021, we filed a Current Report on Form 8-K with the SEC voluntarily making supplemental disclosures related to the Proposed Connect Transaction.
In light of the supplemental disclosures, the plaintiffs in the Actions agreed to dismiss their claims with prejudice as to the named plaintiffs only and without prejudice to all other members of the putative class.
As of February 25, 2021, the four Actions filed in federal court have been voluntarily dismissed and the parties in the state court action have filed a stipulation and proposed order of voluntary discontinuance with the court.
We are subject to litigation and other claims in the ordinary course of business, some of which include claims for substantial sums.
Accruals have been recorded when the outcome is probable and can be reasonably estimated.
While the ultimate results of claims and litigation cannot be determined, we expect that the ultimate disposition of these matters will not have a material adverse effect on our operations or financial condition.
However, depending on the amount and the timing, an unfavorable resolution of some or all of these matters could materially affect our future results of operations or cash flows in a particular period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements Except as disclosed above, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements that currently have or are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our consolidated financial condition, changes in financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditure or capital resources.
65 Summary of Recent Accounting Pronouncements Financial Instruments – Credit Losses Effective January 1, 2020, we adopted ASU, “Financial Instruments – Credit Losses (Topic 326), Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments”.
The standard significantly changes how entities measure credit losses for most financial assets and certain other instruments that are not measured at fair value through net income.
The standard replaced the “incurred loss” approach with an “expected loss” model for instruments measured at amortized cost.
For available-for-sale debt securities, entities are required to record allowances rather than reduce the carrying amount under the other-than-temporary impairment model.
It also simplifies the accounting model for purchased credit-impaired debt securities and loans.
Upon adoption, this new standard did not have a significant impact on our consolidated balance sheets and statements of operations.
Compensation-Retirement Benefits-Defined Benefit Plans-General Effective December 31, 2020, we adopted ASU No.
2018-14, Compensation—Retirement Benefits—Defined Benefit Plans—General (Subtopic 715-20), which amends the current disclosure requirements regarding defined benefit pensions and other post retirement plans, and allows for the removal of certain disclosures, while adding certain new disclosure requirements.
Upon adoption, this new standard did not have a significant impact on our disclosures.
Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income taxes In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No.
2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes which amends and aims to simplify accounting disclosure requirements regarding a number of topics including: intraperiod tax allocation, accounting for deferred taxes when there are changes in consolidation of certain investments, tax basis step up in an acquisition and the application of effective rate changes during interim periods, amongst other improvements.
This standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020 and allows for early adoption.
We will adopt this guidance when it becomes effective, in the first quarter of 2021, and the impact on our financial statements is not expected to be material.
Reference Rate Reform-Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting On March 12, 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (“ASC 848”): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting.
ASC 848 contains optional expedients and exceptions for applying GAAP to contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions affected by reference rate reform.
The provisions of ASC 848 must be applied at a Topic, Subtopic or Industry Subtopic for all transactions other than derivatives, which may be applied at a hedging relationship level.
We have elected to apply the hedge accounting expedients related to probability and the assessments of effectiveness for future LIBOR-indexed cash flows to assume that the index upon which future hedged transactions will be based matches the index on the corresponding derivatives.
Application of these expedients preserves the presentation of derivatives consistent with past presentation.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the guidance and may apply other elections as applicable as additional changes in the market occur.
66 Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Market risk is the potential loss arising from adverse changes in market rates and market prices such as interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates, and changes in the market value of equity instruments.
We are exposed to market risk, primarily related to foreign exchange and interest rates.
We actively monitor these exposures.
Historically, in order to manage the volatility relating to these exposures, we entered into a variety of derivative financial instruments, mainly interest rate swaps, cross-currency swaps and forward rate agreements.
Currently we only employ basic contracts, that is, without options, embedded or otherwise.
Our objective is to reduce, where it is deemed appropriate to do so, fluctuations in earnings, cash flows and the value of our net investments in subsidiaries resulting from changes in interest rates and foreign currency rates.
It is our policy not to trade in financial instruments.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk We operate globally and we predominantly generate revenues and expenses in local currencies.
Because of fluctuations (including possible devaluations) in currency exchange rates or the imposition of limitations on conversion of foreign currencies into our reporting currency, we are subject to currency translation exposure on the profits of our operations, in addition to transaction exposure.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a net loss of $2 million and a net gain of $1 million, respectively, associated with foreign currency derivative financial instruments within foreign currency exchange transactions gains/(losses), net in our consolidated statements of operations.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the notional amounts of outstanding foreign currency derivative financial instruments were $68 million and $125 million, respectively.
The table below details the percentage of revenues and expenses by currency for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019: U.S.
Dollars Euro Other Currencies Year ended December 31, 2020 Revenues 59 % 11 % 30 % Operating costs 61 % 10 % 29 % Year ended December 31, 2019 Revenues 58 % 10 % 32 % Operating costs 56 % 11 % 33 % Based on the year ended December 31, 2020, a one cent change in the U.S. dollar/Euro exchange rate would have impacted revenues by approximately $6 million annually, with an immaterial impact on operating income/(loss).
Interest Rate Risk We continually review our fixed and variable rate debt along with related hedging opportunities in order to ensure our portfolio is appropriately balanced as part of our overall interest rate risk management strategy and through this process we consider both short-term and long-term considerations in the U.S. and global financial markets in making adjustments to our tolerable exposures to interest rate risk.
At December 31, 2020, we had $4,971 million of floating-rate debt under our senior secured credit facilities, of which $1,300 million was subject to effective floating-fixed interest rate swaps.
A one percent increase in interest rates applied to our floating rate indebtedness would therefore increase annual interest expense by approximately $37 million ($50 million without giving effect to any of our interest rate swaps).
In May 2019, the Company entered into a $150 million aggregate notional amount four-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of July 9, 2019.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate-debt at an average rate of 1.82%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In March 2019, the Company entered into a $150 million aggregate notional amount four-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of April 9, 2019.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate-debt at an average rate of 2.26%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In March 2019, the Company entered into a $250 million aggregate notional amount four-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of June 9, 2019.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding 67 amount of the Company’s variable-rate-debt at an average rate of 2.07%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In May 2018, the Company entered into $250 million aggregate notional amount of a five-year interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of May 9, 2018.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 2.72%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In August 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a four-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of October 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.60%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In March 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a five-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of July 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 2.00%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
Derivative instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of non-performance, or credit risk.
We do not believe that we currently face a significant risk of loss in the event of non-performance by the counterparties associated with these instruments, as these transactions were executed with a diversified group of major financial institutions with a minimum investment-grade or better credit rating.
Our credit risk exposure is managed through the continuous monitoring of our exposures to such counterparties.
68 Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Nielsen Holdings plc Index to Consolidated Financial Statements Management’s Annual Report on Internal Controls Over Financial Reporting 70 Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 71 Consolidated Statements of Operations 74 Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income/(Loss) 75 Consolidated Balance Sheets 76 Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 77 Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity 78 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 81 Schedule I – Consolidated Financial Information of Registrant 134 Schedule II – Valuation and Qualifying Accounts 137 69 Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting for the Company as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) or 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
Our internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Management has performed an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on the framework and criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework).
Based on this evaluation, management has concluded that our internal controls over financial reporting were effective as of December 31, 2020.
Ernst & Young LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, has provided an attestation report on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
The Company’s financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K also have been audited by Ernst & Young LLP.
Their reports follow.
/s/ David Kenny /s/ Linda Zukauckas David Kenny Linda Zukauckas Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer February 25, 2021 February 25, 2021 70 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of Nielsen Holdings plc Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting We have audited Nielsen Holdings plc’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on the criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) (the COSO criteria).
In our opinion, Nielsen Holdings plc (the Company) maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on the COSO criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated balance sheets of the Company as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income/(loss), changes in equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, and the related notes and financial statement schedules listed in the Index to Financial Statements in Item 8 and our report dated February 25, 2021 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Basis for Opinion The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting included in the accompanying Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances.
We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP New York, New York February 25, 2021 71 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of Nielsen Holdings plc Opinion on the Financial Statements We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Nielsen Holdings plc (the Company) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income/(loss), changes in equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, and the related notes and financial statement schedules listed in the Index to Financial Statements in Item 8 (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”).
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report dated February 25, 2021 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Basis for Opinion These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audits.
We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks.
Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements.
Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matters The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current period audit of the financial statements that were communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that: (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved our especially challenging, subjective or complex judgments.
The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts or disclosures to which they relate.
Recoverability of indefinite-lived trade name Description of the Matter As more fully described in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements, indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that require the performance of an interim impairment assessment.
As a result of the annual impairment test of the indefinite-lived trade names, the Company concluded that one of its indefinite-lived trade name assets was impaired and recorded an $88 million impairment charge.
Auditing management’s indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment test involved especially complex and subjective auditor judgment due to the estimation required in determining the fair value of the indefinite-lived trade name.
The estimate of fair value of the trade name is determined using the “relief from royalty” discounted cash flow valuation methodology.
The estimate of fair value was sensitive to significant assumptions such as the Company’s business projections, long term revenue growth rate, royalty rate, and discount rate.
Specifically, the Company’s growth assumptions can be affected adversely by changes in expectations about future market or economic conditions.
72 How We Addressed the Matter in Our Audit We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design and tested the operating effectiveness of controls over the Company’s indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment review process.
For example, we tested controls over the Company’s business projections process as well as controls over the review of the significant assumptions including the long-term revenue growth rate, royalty rate, and discount rate.
To test the estimated fair value of the trade name, we performed audit procedures that included, among others, assessing methodologies and testing the significant assumptions discussed above and the underlying data used by the Company in its analysis.
We compared the significant assumptions used by management to current industry and economic trends, changes to the Company’s business model, customer base or product mix.
We assessed the historical accuracy of management’s estimates and performed sensitivity analyses of the significant assumptions to evaluate the changes in the fair value of the trade name.
We involved valuation specialists to assist in our evaluation of the Company’s analysis, valuation methodology and significant assumptions.
Internally Developed Software Description of the Matter As more fully described in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company internally develops software to facilitate its global information processing, financial reporting and client access needs.
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of software programs are expensed as incurred; costs incurred to produce the finished product after technological feasibility are capitalized as an intangible asset.
At December 31, 2020, the net book value of internally developed software is approximately $1.2 billion.
Auditing the Company’s accounting for the capitalization of its internally developed software involved especially challenging and subjective auditor judgment because of the degree of subjectivity involved in assessing which projects met the applicable accounting requirements.
How We Addressed the Matter in Our Audit We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design and tested the operating effectiveness of controls.
For example, we tested controls over the Company’s process to ensure that projects met applicable requirements for capitalization, that costs being capitalized were appropriate, and that the determination of technological feasibility was appropriate.
Our audit procedures included, among others, testing a sample of projects to verify proper approval and that the timing and nature of costs being capitalized is appropriate.
This included performing inquiries with the project managers to understand the purpose and nature of each project.
Testing was also performed to verify that technological feasibility was met.
This included testing of third-party costs and internal personnel related costs (i.e., payroll) for employees directly associated with the projects.
For projects placed into service, we verified the appropriate transfer of the work-in-process asset to an amortizable asset account.
Recoverability of Deferred Tax Assets Description of the Matter As more fully described in Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company records a valuation allowance based on the assessment of the realizability of the Company’s deferred tax assets.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had deferred tax assets before valuation allowances of $1.3 billion.
Auditing management’s assessment of recoverability of deferred tax assets involved especially challenging and subjective auditor judgment in determining whether the combination of the timing of deferred tax liability reversal and the generation of sufficient future taxable income supports the realization of the Company’s existing deferred tax assets before expiration.
How We Addressed the Matter in Our Audit We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design and tested the operating effectiveness of internal controls.
For example, we tested controls over management’s process of evaluating the realizability of deferred tax assets including the scheduling of the reversal of existing temporary differences and estimates of future taxable income.
Among other audit procedures performed, we tested the Company’s scheduling of the reversal of existing temporary taxable differences.
We also evaluated the assumptions used by the Company to develop estimates of future taxable income by jurisdiction and tested the completeness and accuracy of the underlying data.
For example, we compared the estimates of future taxable income with the actual results of prior periods, as well as management’s consideration of other future market conditions.
We also assessed the accuracy of management’s historical estimates and compared the estimate of future taxable income with other forecasted financial information prepared by the Company.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP We have served as the Company's auditor since 2006.
New York, New York February 25, 2021 73 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statements of Operations Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS EXCEPT SHARE AND PER SHARE DATA) 2020 2019 2018 Revenues $ 6,290 $ 6,498 $ 6,515 Cost of revenues, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 2,760 2,822 2,805 Selling, general and administrative expenses, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 1,872 1,929 1,958 Depreciation and amortization 864 756 675 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets 184 1,004 1,413 Restructuring charges 144 80 139 Operating income/(loss) 466 (93 ) (475 ) Interest income 2 6 8 Interest expense (371 ) (397 ) (394 ) Foreign currency exchange transaction gains/(losses), net (9 ) (10 ) (16 ) Other income/(expense), net (14 ) (169 ) (5 ) Income/(loss) from continuing operations before income taxes 74 (663 ) (882 ) Benefit/(provision) for income taxes (67 ) 260 182 Net income/(loss) 7 (403 ) (700 ) Net income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests 13 12 12 Net income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders $ (6 ) $ (415 ) $ (712 ) Net income/(loss) per share of common stock, basic Net income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders $ (0.02 ) $ (1.17 ) $ (2.00 ) Net income/(loss) per share of common stock, diluted Net income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders $ (0.02 ) $ (1.17 ) $ (2.00 ) Weighted-average shares of common stock outstanding, basic 356,860,635 355,731,862 355,601,564 Dilutive shares of common stock — — — Weighted-average shares of common stock outstanding, diluted 356,860,635 355,731,862 355,601,564 Dividends declared per common share $ 0.24 $ 1.11 $ 1.39 The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
74 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income/(Loss) Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 Net income/(loss) $ 7 $ (403 ) $ (700 ) Other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax Foreign currency translation adjustments (1) (45 ) 5 (170 ) Changes in the fair value of cash flow hedges (2) (20 ) (30 ) 1 Defined benefit pension plan adjustments (3) (35 ) 132 (2 ) Total other comprehensive income/(loss) (100 ) 107 (171 ) Total comprehensive income/(loss) (93 ) (296 ) (871 ) Less: comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests 13 14 11 Total comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders $ (106 ) $ (310 ) $ (882 ) (1) Net of tax of $9 million, $(4) million and $(6) million for the year ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 respectively.
(2) Net of tax of $8 million, $11 million and $(1) million for the year ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 respectively.
(3) Net of tax of $8 million, $(8) million and zero million for the year ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 respectively.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements 75 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Balance Sheets December 31, (IN MILLIONS, EXCEPT SHARE AND PER SHARE DATA) 2020 2019 Assets: Current assets Cash and cash equivalents $ 610 $ 454 Trade and other receivables, net of allowances for doubtful accounts and sales returns of $41 and $28 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively 1,154 1,103 Prepaid expenses and other current assets 460 420 Total current assets 2,224 1,977 Non-current assets Property, plant and equipment, net 447 466 Operating lease right-of-use asset 378 393 Goodwill 6,040 5,993 Other intangible assets, net 4,470 4,881 Deferred tax assets 281 276 Other non-current assets 295 333 Total assets $ 14,135 $ 14,319 Liabilities and equity: Current liabilities Accounts payable and other current liabilities $ 1,209 $ 1,182 Deferred revenues 370 345 Income tax liabilities 42 60 Current portion of long-term debt, finance lease obligations and short-term borrowings 293 914 Total current liabilities 1,914 2,501 Non-current liabilities Long-term debt and finance lease obligations 8,014 7,395 Deferred tax liabilities 953 1,052 Operating lease liabilities 358 370 Other non-current liabilities 653 613 Total liabilities 11,892 11,931 Commitments and contingencies (Note 16) Equity: Nielsen shareholders’ equity Common stock, €0.07 par value, 1,185,800,000 and 1,185,800,000 shares authorized; 357,678,263 and 356,158,879 shares issued and 357,644,935 and 356,149,883 shares outstanding at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively 32 32 Additional paid-in capital 4,340 4,378 Retained earnings/(accumulated deficit) (1,216 ) (1,210 ) Accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of income taxes (1,105 ) (1,005 ) Total Nielsen shareholders’ equity 2,051 2,195 Noncontrolling interests 192 193 Total equity 2,243 2,388 Total liabilities and equity $ 14,135 $ 14,319 The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
76 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 Operating Activities Net income/(loss) $ 7 $ (403 ) $ (700 ) Adjustments to reconcile net income/(loss) to net cash provided by operating activities: Share-based compensation expense 53 50 35 Deferred income tax (69 ) 5 (514 ) Currency exchange rate differences on financial transactions and other (gains)/losses 23 178 17 Equity in net income/(loss) of affiliates, net of dividends received — 1 — Depreciation and amortization 864 756 675 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets 184 1,004 1,413 Changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of effect of businesses acquired and divested: Trade and other receivables, net (28 ) 4 95 Prepaid expenses and other assets 138 64 (76 ) Accounts payable and other current liabilities and deferred revenues (38 ) (20 ) (21 ) Other non-current liabilities (95 ) (95 ) (6 ) Interest payable 13 11 14 Income taxes (53 ) (489 ) 126 Net cash provided by operating activities 999 1,066 1,058 Investing Activities Acquisition of subsidiaries and affiliates, net of cash acquired (30 ) (61 ) (43 ) Proceeds from the sale of subsidiaries and affiliates, net 13 17 51 Additions to property, plant and equipment and other assets (86 ) (116 ) (106 ) Additions to intangible assets (433 ) (403 ) (414 ) Proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment and other assets — — 4 Other investing activities (1 ) (19 ) 2 Net cash used in by investing activities (537 ) (582 ) (506 ) Financing Activities Net borrowings under revolving credit facility — — — Proceeds from issuances of debt, net of issuance costs 2,971 — 781 Repayment of debt (3,092 ) (57 ) (819 ) Cash dividends paid to shareholders (86 ) (395 ) (494 ) Repurchase of common stock — — (70 ) Activity from share-based compensation plans (12 ) (8 ) 15 Proceeds from employee stock purchase plan 3 4 5 Finance leases (60 ) (60 ) (76 ) Other financing activities (31 ) (28 ) (18 ) Net cash used in financing activities (307 ) (544 ) (676 ) Effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 1 (10 ) (8 ) Net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 156 (70 ) (132 ) Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 454 524 656 Cash and cash equivalents at end of period $ 610 $ 454 $ 524 Supplemental Cash Flow Information Cash paid for income taxes $ (189 ) $ (224 ) $ (206 ) Cash paid for interest, net of amounts capitalized $ (358 ) $ (386 ) $ (380 ) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
77 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss), Net Additional Retained Earnings Currency Cash Post Total Nielsen Common Paid-in (Accumulated) Translation Flow Employment Shareholders’ Noncontrolling Total (IN MILLIONS) Stock Capital (Deficit) Adjustments Hedges Benefits Equity Interests Equity Balance, December 31, 2017 $ 32 $ 4,742 $ 411 $ (610 ) $ 10 $ (340 ) $ 4,245 $ 198 $ 4,443 Net income/(loss) — — (712 ) — — — (712 ) 12 (700 ) Currency translation adjustments, net of tax of $(6) — — — (169 ) — — (169 ) (1 ) (170 ) Cash flow hedges, net of tax of $(1) — — — — 1 — 1 — 1 Defined benefit pension plan adjustments net of tax of zero — — — — — (2 ) (2 ) — (2 ) Employee stock purchase plan — 5 — — — — 5 — 5 Dividends to shareholders — — (494 ) — — — (494 ) (13 ) (507 ) Common stock activity from share-based compensation plans — 15 — — — — 15 — 15 Repurchase of common stock — (70 ) — — — — (70 ) — (70 ) Share-based compensation expense — 28 — — — — 28 — 28 Balance, December 31, 2018 $ 32 $ 4,720 $ (795 ) $ (779 ) $ 11 $ (342 ) $ 2,847 $ 196 $ 3,043 78 Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss), Net Additional Retained Earnings Currency Cash Post Total Nielsen Common Paid-in (Accumulated) Translation Flow Employment Shareholders’ Noncontrolling Total (IN MILLIONS) Stock Capital (Deficit) Adjustments Hedges Benefits Equity Interests Equity Balance, December 31, 2018 $ 32 $ 4,720 $ (795 ) $ (779 ) $ 11 $ (342 ) $ 2,847 $ 196 $ 3,043 Net income/(loss) — — (415 ) — — — (415 ) 12 (403 ) Currency translation adjustments, net of tax of $(4) — — — 3 — — 3 2 5 Cash flow hedges, net of tax of $11 — — — — (30 ) — (30 ) — (30 ) Defined benefit pension plan adjustments, net of tax of $(8) — — — — — 132 132 — 132 Capital contribution by a non-controlling partner — — — — — — — 2 2 Divestiture of a non-controlling interest in a consolidated subsidiary — — — — — — — (2 ) (2 ) Employee stock purchase plan — 4 — — — — 4 — 4 Dividends to shareholders — (395 ) — — — — (395 ) (17 ) (412 ) Common stock activity from share-based compensation plans — (8 ) — — — — (8 ) — (8 ) Share-based compensation expense — 57 — — — — 57 — 57 Balance, December 31, 2019 $ 32 $ 4,378 $ (1,210 ) $ (776 ) $ (19 ) $ (210 ) $ 2,195 $ 193 $ 2,388 79 Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss), Net Additional Retained Earnings Currency Cash Post Total Nielsen Common Paid-in (Accumulated) Translation Flow Employment Shareholders’ Noncontrolling Total (IN MILLIONS) Stock Capital (Deficit) Adjustments Hedges Benefits Equity Interests Equity Balance, December 31, 2019 $ 32 $ 4,378 $ (1,210 ) $ (776 ) $ (19 ) $ (210 ) $ 2,195 $ 193 $ 2,388 Net income/(loss) — — (6 ) — — — (6 ) 13 7 Currency translation adjustments, net of tax of $9 — — — (45 ) — — (45 ) — (45 ) Cash flow hedges, net of tax of $8 — — — — (20 ) — (20 ) — (20 ) Defined benefit pension plan adjustments, net of tax of $8 — — — — — (35 ) (35 ) — (35 ) Capital contribution by a non-controlling partner — — — — — — — 1 1 Employee stock purchase plan — 4 — — — — 4 — 4 Dividends to shareholders — (86 ) — — — — (86 ) (15 ) (101 ) Common stock activity from share-based compensation plans — (12 ) — — — — (12 ) — (12 ) Share-based compensation expense — 56 — — — — 56 — 56 Balance, December 31, 2020 $ 32 $ 4,340 $ (1,216 ) $ (821 ) $ (39 ) $ (245 ) $ 2,051 $ 192 $ 2,243 The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
80 Nielsen Holding plc Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 1.
Description of Business, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies Nielsen Holdings plc (“Nielsen” or the “Company”), together with its subsidiaries, is a leading global measurement and data analytics company that provides the most complete and trusted view available of consumers and markets worldwide.
The Company’s approach marries proprietary Nielsen data with other data sources to help clients around the world understand what’s happening now, what’s happening next, and how to best act on this knowledge.
Nielsen is divided into two reporting segments: Nielsen Global Media (“Media”) and Nielsen Global Connect (“Connect”).
Media provides media and advertising clients with unbiased and reliable metrics that create the shared understanding of the industry required for markets to function.
Media helps clients to define exactly who they want to reach, as well as optimize the outcomes they can achieve.
The company's cross-platform measurement strategy brings together the best of TV and digital measurement to ensure a more functional marketplace for the industry.
Connect provides consumer packaged goods manufacturers and retailers with accurate, actionable information and a complete picture of the complex and changing marketplace that brands need to innovate and grow their businesses.
Connect provides data and builds tools that use predictive models to turn observations in the marketplace into business decisions and winning solutions.
The business's data and insights, combined with the only open, cloud native measurement and analytics platform that democratizes the power of data, continue to provide an essential foundation that makes markets possible in the rapidly evolving world of commerce.
Nielsen has operations in over 90 countries, with its registered office located in Oxford, the United Kingdom and headquarters located in New York, United States.
On August 31, 2015, Nielsen N.V., a Dutch public company listed on the New York Stock Exchange, merged with Nielsen Holdings plc, by way of a cross-border merger under the European Cross-Border Merger Directive, with Nielsen Holdings plc being the surviving company (the “Merger”).
The Merger effectively changed the place of incorporation of Nielsen’s publicly traded parent holding company from the Netherlands to England and Wales, with no changes made to the business being conducted by Nielsen prior to the Merger.
Due to the fact that the Merger was a business combination between entities under common control, the exchange of assets and liabilities were made at carrying value.
Therefore, there were no direct accounting implications in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
On October 31, 2020, Nielsen entered into an agreement to sell its Global Connect business to affiliates of Advent International Corporation (“Advent”) (the “Transaction”), for $2.7 billion in cash, subject to adjustments based on closing levels of cash, indebtedness, debt-like items and working capital, and a warrant to purchase equity interests in the company that will own the Global Connect business (the “Warrant”).
The Transaction was unanimously approved by the Company’s Board of Directors and at a special meeting on February 11, 2021, Nielsen’s shareholders approved the Transaction.
The Transaction is subject to approval by regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions; and the Proposed Connect Transaction is expected to close in the next 90 days.
On June 30, 2020, Nielsen announced a broad-based optimization plan (the “Restructuring Plan”) to drive permanent cost savings and operational efficiencies, as well as to position the Company for greater profitability and growth.
The plan was substantially completed in 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, pre-tax restructuring charges were $144 million.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements are presented in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”).
All amounts are presented in U.S.
Dollars (“$”), except for share and per share data or where expressly stated as being in other currencies, e.g., Euros (“€”).
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Nielsen and all subsidiaries and other controlled entities.
The Company has evaluated events occurring subsequent to December 31, 2020 for potential recognition or disclosure in the consolidated financial statements and concluded there were no subsequent events that required recognition or disclosure other than those provided.
Consolidation The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Nielsen and all subsidiaries and other controlled entities.
Noncontrolling interests in subsidiaries are reported as a component of equity in the consolidated financial statements with disclosure on the face of the consolidated statements of operations of the amounts of consolidated net income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders and to the noncontrolling interests.
The equity method of accounting is used for investments in affiliates and joint ventures where Nielsen has significant influence but not control, usually supported by a shareholding of between 20% and 50% of the voting rights.
In addition, the Company records changes in the fair value of non-equity method equity investments with readily 81 determinable fair values in net income rather than in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss).
Investments that do not have readily determinable fair values are recognized at cost minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer.
The adjustments related to the observable price changes will also be recognized in net income.
Intercompany accounts and transactions between consolidated companies have been eliminated in consolidation.
Foreign Currency Translation Nielsen has significant investments outside the U.S., primarily in the Euro-zone, Canada and the United Kingdom.
Therefore, changes in the value of foreign currencies affect the consolidated financial statements when translated into U.S.
Dollars.
The functional currency for substantially all subsidiaries outside the U.S. is the local currency.
Financial statements for these subsidiaries are translated into U.S.
Dollars at period-end exchange rates as to the assets and liabilities and monthly average exchange rates as to revenues, expenses and cash flows.
For these countries, currency translation adjustments are recognized in shareholders’ equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss), net, whereas transaction gains and losses are recognized in foreign exchange transaction losses, net in the consolidated statement of operations.
Use of Estimates The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Research and Development Costs Research and development costs, which were not material for any periods presented, are expensed as incurred.
Deferred Costs Incremental direct costs incurred related to establishing or significantly expanding a panel in a designated market are deferred at the point when Nielsen determines them to be recoverable.
Prior to this point, these costs are expensed as incurred.
These deferred costs are typically amortized through cost of revenues over the original contract period beginning when the panel or infrastructure to service new clients is ready for its intended use.
Advertising and Marketing Costs Advertising and marketing costs are expensed as incurred and are reflected as selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
These costs include all brand advertising, telemarketing, direct mail and other sales promotion associated with marketing/media research services.
Advertising and marketing costs totaled $11 million, $18 million and $18 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Computation of Net Income per Share Basic net income per share is computed using the weighted-average number of common stock outstanding during the period.
Diluted net income per share is computed using the weighted-average number of shares of common stock and dilutive potential shares of common stock outstanding during the period.
Dilutive potential shares of common stock primarily consist of employee stock options and restricted stock.
Employee stock options, restricted stock and similar equity instruments granted by the Company are treated as potential common stock outstanding in computing diluted earnings per share.
Diluted stock outstanding includes nonvested restricted stock units and the dilutive effect of in-the-money options which is calculated based on the average share price for each period using the treasury stock method.
Under the treasury stock method, the amount the employee must pay for exercising stock options, the amount of compensation cost for future service that the Company has not yet recognized are assumed to be used to repurchase stock.
The effect of 7,743,535, 8,181,944 and 8,519,133 shares of common stock equivalents under stock compensation plans were excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, as such shares would have been anti-dilutive.
82 Comprehensive Income/(Loss) Comprehensive income/(loss) is reported in the accompanying consolidated statements of comprehensive income/(loss) and consists of net income/(loss) and other gains and losses, net of tax, affecting equity that are excluded from net income/(loss).
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include cash and short-term, highly liquid investments with an original maturity date of three months or less.
Cash and cash equivalents are carried at fair value.
Accounts Receivable The Company extends non-interest bearing trade credit to its customers in the ordinary course of business.
To minimize credit risk, ongoing credit evaluations of client’s financial condition are performed.
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASU, “Financial Instruments – Credit Losses (Topic 326), Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments”.
Prior to the adoption, an estimate of the allowance for doubtful accounts was made when collection of the full amount was no longer probable (incurred loss) or returns were expected.
Subsequent to the adoption, as noted in Note 2, the allowance for doubtful accounts is made when collection of the full amounts is no longer probable by also incorporating reasonable and supportable forecasts (expected loss).
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company sold $249 million, $360 million and $295 million, respectively, of accounts receivables to third parties and recorded an immaterial loss on the sale to interest expense, net in the consolidated statement of operations.
As of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, $30 million, $85 million and $105 million, respectively, of previously sold receivables, remained outstanding.
The sales were accounted for as true sales, without recourse.
Nielsen maintains servicing responsibilities of the majority of the receivables sold during the year, for which the related costs are not significant.
The proceeds of $249 million, $360 million and $295 million from the sales were reported as a component of the changes in trade and other receivables, net within operating activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
Other Significant Accounting Policies The following table includes other significant accounting policies that are described in other notes to the financial statements, including the related note: Significant Accounting Policy Note Revenue recognition 3 Leases 5 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets 6 Impairment of Long-Lived Assets 6&8 Property, Plant and Equipment 8 Investments 9 Financial Instruments 9 Derivative Financial Instruments 9 Pensions and Other Post Retirement Benefits 11 Share-Based Compensation 14 Income Taxes 15 2.
Summary of Recent Accounting Pronouncements Financial Instruments – Credit Losses Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASU, “Financial Instruments – Credit Losses (Topic 326), Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments”.
The standard significantly changes how entities measure credit losses for most financial assets and certain other instruments that are not measured at fair value through net income.
The standard replaced the “incurred loss” approach with an “expected loss” model for instruments measured at amortized cost.
For available-for-sale debt securities, entities are required to record allowances rather than reduce the carrying amount under the other-than-temporary impairment model.
It also simplifies the accounting model for purchased credit-impaired debt securities and loans.
Upon adoption, this new standard did not have a significant impact on Nielsen’s consolidated balance sheets and statements of operations.
Compensation-Retirement Benefits-Defined Benefit Plans-General 83 Effective December 15, 2020, the Company adopted ASU No.
2018-14, Compensation—Retirement Benefits—Defined Benefit Plans—General (Subtopic 715-20), which amends the current disclosure requirements regarding defined benefit pensions and other post retirement plans, and allows for the removal of certain disclosures, while adding certain new disclosure requirements.
Upon adoption, this new standard did not have a significant impact on Nielsen’s disclosures.
Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income taxes In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No.
2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes which amends and aims to simplify accounting disclosure requirements regarding a number of topics including: intraperiod tax allocation, accounting for deferred taxes when there are changes in consolidation of certain investments, tax basis step up in an acquisition and the application of effective rate changes during interim periods, amongst other improvements.
This standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020 and allows for early adoption.
Nielsen will adopt this guidance when it becomes effective, in the first quarter of 2021, and the impact on our financial statements is not expected to be material.
Reference Rate Reform-Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting On March 12, 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (“ASC 848”): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting.
ASC 848 contains optional expedients and exceptions for applying GAAP to contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions affected by reference rate reform.
The provisions of ASC 848 must be applied at a Topic, Subtopic or Industry Subtopic for all transactions other than derivatives, which may be applied at a hedging relationship level.
The Company has elected to apply the hedge accounting expedients related to probability and the assessments of effectiveness for future LIBOR-indexed cash flows to assume that the index upon which future hedged transactions will be based matches the index on the corresponding derivatives.
Application of these expedients preserves the presentation of derivatives consistent with past presentation.
The Company continues to evaluate the impact of the guidance and may apply other elections as applicable as additional changes in the market occur.
3.
Revenue Recognition Revenue is measured based on the consideration specified in a contract with a customer.
The Company recognizes revenue when it satisfies a performance obligation by transferring control of a product or service to a customer, which generally occurs over time.
Substantially all of the Company’s customer contracts are non-cancelable and non-refundable.
The following is a description of principal activities, by reportable segment, from which the Company generates its revenues.
Revenue from the Connect segment consists primarily of measurement services, which include the Company’s core tracking and scan data (primarily transactional measurement data and consumer behavior information) to businesses in the consumer packaged goods industry.
Nielsen’s data is used by its clients to measure their market share, tracking billions of sales transactions per month in retail outlets around the world.
Revenues for these services are recognized over the period during which the performance obligations are satisfied as the customer receives and consumes the benefits provided by the Company and control of the services are transferred to the customer.
The Company also provides consumer intelligence and analytical services that help clients make smarter business decisions throughout their product development and marketing cycles.
The Company’s performance under these arrangements do not create an asset with an alternative use to the company and generally include an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date, as such, revenue for these services is typically recognized over time.
Revenue for contracts that do not include an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date is recognized at a point in time when the performance obligation is satisfied, generally upon delivery of the services, and when control of the service is transferred to the customer.
Revenue from Nielsen’s Media segment is primarily generated from television, radio, digital and mobile audience measurement services and analytics which are used by the Company’s media clients to establish the value of airtime and more effectively schedule and promote their programming and the Company’s advertising clients to plan and optimize their spending.
As the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided by the Company’s performance, revenues for these services are recognized over the period during which the performance obligations are satisfied and control of the service is transferred to the customer.
84 The Company enters into cooperation arrangements with certain customers, under which the customer provides Nielsen with its data in exchange for Nielsen’s services.
Nielsen records these transactions at fair value, which is determined based on the fair value of goods or services received, if reasonably estimable.
If not reasonably estimable, the Company considers the fair value of the goods or services surrendered.
The table below sets forth the Company’s revenue disaggregated within each segment by major product offerings and timing of revenue recognition.
(IN MILLIONS) Year Ended December 31, 2020 2019 2018 Connect Segment Measure $ 2,073 $ 2,161 $ 2,211 Predict/Activate 856 896 927 Connect $ 2,929 $ 3,057 $ 3,138 Media Segment Audience Measurement $ 2,455 2,471 2,411 Plan/Optimize 906 970 966 
Media $ 3,361 $ 3,441 $ 3,377 Total $ 6,290 $ 6,498 $ 6,515 Timing of revenue recognition Products transferred at a point in time $ 624 $ 576 $ 576 Products and services transferred over time 5,666 5,922 5,939 Total $ 6,290 $ 6,498 $ 6,515 Contract Assets and Liabilities Contract assets represent the Company’s rights to consideration in exchange for services transferred to a customer that have not been billed as of the reporting date.
While the Company’s rights to consideration are generally unconditional at the time its performance obligations are satisfied, under certain circumstances the related billing occurs in arrears, generally within one month of the services being rendered.
At the inception of a contract, the Company generally expects the period between when it transfers its services to its customers and when the customer pays for such services will be one year or less.
Contract liabilities relate to advance consideration received or the right to consideration that is unconditional from customers for which revenue is recognized when the performance obligation is satisfied and control transferred to the customer.
The table below sets forth the Company’s contract assets and contract liabilities from contracts with customers.
(IN MILLIONS) Year Ended December 31, 2020 2019 Contract assets $ 256 $ 218 Contract liabilities $ 370 $ 346 The increase in the contract assets balance during the period was primarily due to $222 million of revenue recognized that was not billed, in accordance with the terms of the contracts, as of December 31, 2020, offset by $186 million of contract assets included in the December 31, 2019 balance that were invoiced to Nielsen’s clients and therefore transferred to trade receivables.
85 The increase in the contract liability balance during the period was primarily due to $339 million of advance consideration received or the right to consideration that is unconditional from customers for which revenue was not recognized during the period, offset by $324 million of revenue recognized during the period that had been included in the December 31, 2019 contract liability balance.
Transaction Price Allocated to the Remaining Performance Obligations As of December 31, 2020, approximately $6.2 billion of revenue is expected to be recognized from remaining performance obligations that are unsatisfied (or partially unsatisfied) for Nielsen’s services.
This amount excludes variable consideration allocated to performance obligations related to sales and usage based royalties on licenses of intellectual property.
The Company expects to recognize revenue on approximately 83% of these remaining performance obligations through December 31, 2022, with the balance recognized thereafter.
Deferred Costs Incremental direct costs incurred to build the infrastructure to service new contracts are capitalized as a contract cost.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the balances of such capitalized costs were $16 million and $11 million, respectively.
These costs are typically amortized through cost of revenues over the original contract period beginning when the infrastructure to service new clients is ready for its intended use.
The amortization of these costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $7 million and $8 million, respectively.
There was no impairment loss recorded in any of the periods recorded.
Expected Credit Losses Nielsen is required to measure expected credit losses on trade accounts receivable.
Nielsen considered the asset’s contractual life, the risk of loss and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions.
The estimate of expected credit losses reflects the risk of loss, even if management believes no loss was incurred as of the measurement date.
The following schedule represents the allowance for doubtful accounts rollforward incorporating expected credit losses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(IN MILLIONS) BalanceBeginning ofPeriod Charges toExpense Deductions Effect ofForeignCurrencyTranslation Balance atEnd ofPeriod Allowance for doubtful accounts Year ended December 31, 2020 $ 12 $ 8 $ (4 ) $ 1 $ 17 Year ended December 31, 2019 15 1 (4 ) - 12 4. Business Acquisitions and Dispositions For the year ended December 31, 2020, Nielsen paid cash consideration of $30 million associated with current period acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Had these 2020 acquisitions occurred as of January 1, 2020, the impact on Nielsen’s consolidated results of operations would not have been material.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, Nielsen paid cash consideration of $61 million associated with current period acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Had these 2019 acquisitions occurred as of January 1, 2019, the impact on Nielsen’s consolidated results of operations would not have been material For the year ended December 31, 2018, Nielsen paid cash consideration of $43 million associated with current period acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Had these 2018 acquisitions occurred as of January 1, 2018, the impact on Nielsen’s consolidated results of operations would not have been material.
There were no discontinued operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
86 5.
Leases All significant lease arrangements are generally recognized at lease commencement.
Operating lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities are recognized at commencement.
An ROU asset and corresponding lease liability are not recorded for leases with an initial term of 12 months or less (short term leases) and Nielsen recognizes lease expense for these leases as incurred over the lease term.
ROU assets represent the Company’s right to use an underlying asset during the reasonably certain lease term and lease liabilities represent its obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease.
Nielsen’s lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that Nielsen will exercise that option.
Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term.
Nielsen uses the rate implicit in the lease for the discount rate when determining the present value of lease payments whenever that rate is readily determinable.
If the rate is not readily determinable, Nielsen uses its incremental borrowing rate, which is updated periodically, based on the information available at commencement date.
The operating lease ROU asset also includes any lease payments related to initial direct cost and prepayments and excludes lease incentives.
Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Nielsen has lease agreements with lease and non-lease components, which are generally accounted for together.
Nielsen has operating and finance leases for real estate facilities, servers, computer hardware, and other equipment.
Nielsen’s leases have remaining lease terms of 1 year to 30 years, some of which include options to extend the leases for up to 5 years, and some of which include options to terminate the leases within 1 year.
The components of lease expense were as follows: (in millions) Year Ended December 31, 2020 Year Ended December 31, 2019 Lease cost Finance lease cost: Amortization of right-of-use assets $ 63 $ 62 Interest on lease liabilities 8 9 Total finance lease cost 71 71 Operating lease cost 126 123 Short-term lease costs 2 5 Sublease income (3 ) (3 ) Total lease cost $ 196 $ 196 Nielsen recognized rental income received under subleases from operating leases of $2 million, $3 million and $6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, Nielsen had aggregate future proceeds to be received under operating lease sub-lease guarantees of $4 million.
87 Supplemental balance sheet information related to leases was as follows: (in millions, except lease term and discount rate) December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 Operating leases Operating lease right-of-use assets $ 378 $ 393 Other current liabilities 114 110 Operating lease liabilities 358 370 Total operating lease liabilities $ 472 $ 480 Finance leases Property, plant and equipment, gross $ 443 $ 393 Accumulated depreciation (267 ) (213 ) Property, plant and equipment, net 176 180 Other intangible assets, gross 27 24 Accumulated amortization (20 ) (13 ) Other intangible assets, net 7 11 Accounts payable and other current liabilities 57 53 Long-term debt and finance lease obligations 84 92 Total finance lease liabilities $ 141 $ 145 Other information Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities Operating cash flows used in finance leases (8 ) (9 ) Operating cash flows used in operating leases (105 ) (126 ) Financing cash flows used in finance leases (60 ) (60 ) Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange for new finance lease liabilities 53 40 Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange for new operating lease liabilities 61 43 Weighted-average remaining lease term--finance leases 3 years 4 years Weighted-average remaining lease term--operating leases 7 years 8 years Weighted-average discount rate--finance leases 5.2 % 6.2 % Weighted-average discount rate--operating leases 4.0 % 4.5 % Annual maturities of Nielsen’s lease liabilities are as follows: (in millions) Operating Leases Finance Leases 2021 $ 123 $ 59 2022 105 43 2023 73 33 2024 51 11 2025 33 1 Thereafter 163 5 Total lease payments 548 152 Less imputed interest (76 ) (11 ) Total $ 472 $ 141 88 6.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets Goodwill Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets, consisting of certain trade names and trademarks, are each tested for impairment on an annual basis and whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such asset may not be recoverable.
Nielsen has designated October 1st as the date in which the annual assessment is performed as this timing corresponds with the development of the Company’s formal budget and business plan review.
Nielsen reviews the recoverability of its goodwill by comparing the estimated fair values of reporting units with their respective carrying amounts.
The Company established, and continues to evaluate, its reporting units based on its internal reporting structure and defines such reporting units at its operating segment level or one level below.
The estimates of fair value of a reporting unit are determined using a combination of valuation techniques, primarily an income approach using a discounted cash flow analysis supplemented by a market-based approach.
A discounted cash flow analysis requires the use of various assumptions, including expectations of future cash flows, growth rates, discount rates and tax rates in developing the present value of future cash flow projections.
The market-based approach utilizes available market comparisons such as indicative industry multiples that are applied to current year revenue and earnings as well as recent comparable transactions.
Nielsen conducted the annual assessment as of October 1, 2020 and concluded that there was no impairment.
Prior to the annual assessment date, during the first quarter of 2020, despite the excess fair value identified in our 2019 impairment assessment, we determined that the significant decline in Nielsen’s market capitalization and impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic indicated that there was a triggering event for an interim assessment.
As a result, we reviewed our previous forecasts and assumptions based on our projections that are subject to various risks and uncertainties, including: forecasted revenues, expenses and cash flows, including the duration and extent of impact to our business from the COVID-19 pandemic, current discount rates, the reduction in Nielsen's market capitalization, and observable market transactions.
Based on our interim impairment assessment as of March 31, 2020, we determined that the estimated fair values of the reporting units exceeded their carrying values (including goodwill), thus no impairment was recorded.
Goodwill is stated at historical cost less accumulated impairments losses, if any.
The table below summarizes the changes in the carrying amount of goodwill by reportable segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(IN MILLIONS) Connect Media Total Balance, December 31, 2018 $ 1,337 $ 5,650 $ 6,987 Acquisitions, divestitures and other adjustments 8 12 20 Impairment (1,004 ) — (1,004 ) Effect of foreign currency translation (10 ) — (10 ) Balance, December 31, 2019 $ 331 $ 5,662 $ 5,993 Acquisitions, divestitures and other adjustments 20 (3 ) 17 Effect of foreign currency translation 9 21 30 Balance, December 31, 2020 $ 360 $ 5,680 $ 6,040 Cumulative impairments $ 2,415 $ 376 $ 2,791 At December 31, 2020, $35 million of goodwill is expected to be deductible for income tax purposes.
89 Other Intangible Assets Intangible assets with finite lives are stated at historical cost, less accumulated amortization and impairment losses.
These intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the following estimated useful lives, which are reviewed annually.
Nielsen has purchased and internally developed software to facilitate its global information processing, financial reporting and client access needs.
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of software programs are expensed as incurred.
Costs that are incurred to produce the finished product after technological feasibility has been established are capitalized as an intangible asset and are amortized over the estimated useful life.
If events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of software may not be recovered, a recoverability analysis is performed based on estimated undiscounted cash flows to be generated from the software in the future.
If the analysis indicates that the carrying value is not recoverable from the future cash flows, the software cost is written down to estimated fair value and an impairment is recognized.
These estimates are subject to revision as market conditions and as the Company’s assessments change.
Certain of the trade names associated with Nielsen are deemed indefinite-lived intangible assets, as their associated Nielsen brand awareness and recognition has existed for over 50 years and the Company intends to continue to utilize these trade names.
There are also no legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic or other factors that may limit their estimated useful lives.
Nielsen reconsiders the remaining estimated useful life of indefinite-lived intangible assets each reporting period.
The impairment test for other indefinite-lived intangible assets consists of a comparison of the fair value of the intangible asset with its carrying amount.
If the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess.
The estimates of fair value of trade names and trademarks are determined using a “relief from royalty” discounted cash flow valuation methodology.
Significant assumptions inherent in this methodology include estimates of royalty rates and discount rates.
Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the respective intangible assets.
Assumptions about royalty rates are based on the rates at which comparable trade names and trademarks are being licensed in the marketplace.
As a result of this testing, Nielsen concluded that the fair value was less than the carrying amount for our indefinite-lived intangible asset within our Connect segment and recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $88 million.
The impairment was primarily a result of change in market comparable data inputs utilized in establishing the discount rate, which resulted in a higher discount rate in the valuation, as well as slightly downward revisions of management’s forecasts of future revenues.
There was no impairment noted in any period presented with respect to the Company’s other indefinite-lived intangible asset compared to Nielsen’s last assessment.
Nielsen is required to assess whether the value of the Company’s amortizable intangible assets have been impaired whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets might not be recoverable.
Nielsen does not perform a periodic assessment of assets for impairment in the absence of such information or indicators.
Conditions that would necessitate an impairment assessment include a significant decline in the observable market value of an asset, a significant change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used or a significant adverse change that would indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets is not recoverable.
Recoverability of assets that are held and used is measured by comparing the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows expected to be derived from an asset (or a group of assets) to their carrying value.
If the carrying value of the asset (or the group of assets) exceeds the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows, impairment is considered to exist.
If impairment is considered to exist based on undiscounted cash flows, the impairment charge is measured using an estimation of the assets’ fair value, typically using a discounted cash flow method.
The identification of impairment indicators, the estimation of future cash flows and the determination of fair values for assets (or groups of assets) requires Nielsen to make significant judgments concerning the identification and validation of impairment indicators, expected cash flows and applicable discount rates.
These estimates are subject to revision as market conditions and the Company’s assessments change.
During 2020, Nielsen decided to exit smaller, underperforming markets and non-core businesses and product line and concluded that this decision represented an impairment indicator for the long-lived assets within those markets and businesses.
In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020, Nielsen identified a change in the extent to which certain self-developed software would be utilized and concluded this represented an impairment indicator.
To the extent that the carrying value of the assets exceeded the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows, we measured an impairment charge using a discounted cash flow method for estimation of the assets’ fair value.
The non-cash impairment charge associated with amortizable intangibles of $43 million was recorded in the quarter ended December 31, 2020, which primarily related to internally developed software within our Connect Segment.
The non-cash impairment charge was $88 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 of which $53 million was recorded within our Media Segment and $35 million was recorded within our Connect Segment.
There was no impairment or indicators of impairment noted in 2019 with respect to the Company’s amortizable intangible assets.
90 The table below summarizes the carrying value of such intangible assets and their estimated useful lives: Gross Amounts Accumulated Amortization Estimated Weighted December 31, December 31, December 31, December 31, (IN MILLIONS) Useful Lives Average 2020 2019 2020 2019 Indefinite-lived intangibles: Trade names and trademarks $ 1,833 $ 1,921 $ — $ — Amortized intangibles: Trade names and trademarks 5-20 years 12 years 145 144 (116 ) (109 ) Customer-related intangibles 6-25 years 21 years 3,141 3,153 (1,926 ) (1,764 ) Covenants-not-to-compete 1-7 years 3 years 37 37 (37 ) (36 ) Content databases 12-16 years 12 years 168 168 (53 ) (40 ) Computer software 3-10 years 5 years 2,845 2,626 (1,601 ) (1,260 ) Patents and other 3-10 years 6 years 164 182 (130 ) (141 ) Total $ 6,500 $ 6,310 $ (3,863 ) $ (3,350 ) The amortization expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $694 million, $580 million and $490 million, respectively.
These amounts include amortization expense associated with computer software of $508 million, $384 million and $283 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, the net book value of purchased software and internally developed software was $32 million and $1,212 million, respectively.
All other intangible assets are subject to amortization.
Future amortization expense is estimated to be as follows: (IN MILLIONS) For the year ending December 31: 2021 $ 637 2022 507 2023 375 2024 262 2025 213 Thereafter 643 Total $ 2,637 7.
Changes in and Reclassification out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) by Component The table below summarizes the changes in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax, by component for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Currency Translation Cash Flow Post Employment (IN MILLIONS) Adjustments Hedges Benefits Total Balance December 31, 2019 $ (776 ) $ (19 ) $ (210 ) $ (1,005 ) Other comprehensive income/(loss) before reclassifications $ (45 ) $ (37 ) $ (44 ) $ (126 ) Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive (income)/loss — 17 9 26 Net current period other comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders (45 ) (20 ) (35 ) (100 ) Balance December 31, 2020 $ (821 ) $ (39 ) $ (245 ) $ (1,105 ) 91 Currency Translation Cash Flow Post Employment (IN MILLIONS) Adjustments Hedges Benefits Total Balance December 31, 2018 $ (779 ) $ 11 $ (342 ) $ (1,110 ) Other comprehensive income/(loss) before reclassifications $ 5 $ (23 ) $ (42 ) $ (60 ) Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive (income)/loss — (7 ) 174 167 Net current period other comprehensive income/(loss) 5 (30 ) 132 107 Net current period other comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interest 2 — — 2 Net current period other comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders 3 (30 ) 132 105 Balance December 31, 2019 $ (776 ) $ (19 ) $ (210 ) $ (1,005 ) The table below summarizes the reclassification of accumulated other comprehensive loss by component for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Amount Reclassified from Accumulated Other (IN MILLIONS) Comprehensive Income/(Loss) Details about Accumulated Other Comprehensive Affected Line Item in the Year Ended December 31, Consolidated Income components 2020 2019 Statement of Operations Cash flow hedges Interest rate contracts $ 23 $ (9 ) Interest (income)/ expense (6 ) 2 (Benefit)/provision for income taxes $ 17 $ (7 ) Total, net of tax Post-Employment Benefits Amortization of actuarial loss $ 17 $ 12 (a) (8 ) 6 (Benefit)/provision for income taxes $ 9 $ 18 Total, net of tax Pension settlements $ - $ 170 (b) - (14 ) (Benefit)/provision for income taxes $ - $ 156 Total, net of tax Total Post-Employment Benefits reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive (income)/loss $ 9 $ 174 Total reclassification for the period $ 26 $ 167 Net of tax (a) This accumulated other comprehensive loss component is included in the computation of net periodic pension cost.
(b) See Note 11 “Pensions and Other Post-Retirement Benefits” for more information on the pension plan non-cash settlements referenced in this note.
92 8.
Property, Plant and Equipment Property, plant and equipment are carried at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Property, plant and equipment are depreciated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives.
Nielsen is required to assess whether the value of our long-lived assets, including the Company’s buildings, improvements, technical and other equipment have been impaired whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets might not be recoverable.
Nielsen does not perform a periodic assessment of assets for impairment in the absence of such information or indicators.
Conditions that would necessitate an impairment assessment include a significant decline in the observable market value of an asset, a significant change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used or a significant adverse change that would indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets is not recoverable.
Recoverability of assets that are held and used is measured by comparing the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows expected to be derived from an asset (or a group of assets) to their carrying value.
If the carrying value of the asset (or the group of assets) exceeds the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows, impairment is considered to exist.
If impairment is considered to exist based on undiscounted cash flows, the impairment charge is measured using an estimation of the assets’ fair value, typically using a discounted cash flow method.
The identification of impairment indicators, the estimation of future cash flows and the determination of fair values for assets (or groups of assets) requires Nielsen to make significant judgments concerning the identification and validation of impairment indicators, expected cash flows and applicable discount rates.
These estimates are subject to revision as market conditions and our assessments change.
During 2020, Nielsen concluded that the decision to exit smaller, underperforming markets and non-core businesses was an impairment indicator for the long-lived assets within those exits.
Where the carrying value of the assets exceeded the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows, we measured an impairment charge using a discounted cash flow method for estimation of the assets’ fair value.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a pre-tax non-cash impairment charge associated with property, plant and equipment of $8 million.
The following tables summarizes the carrying value of our property, plant and equipment including the associated useful lives: Estimated December 31, December 31, (IN MILLIONS) Useful Life 2020 2019 Land and buildings 25-50 years $ 359 $ 383 Information and communication equipment 3-10 years 1,174 1,108 Furniture, equipment and other 3-10 years 88 103 1,621 1,594 Less accumulated depreciation and amortization (1,174 ) (1,128 ) $ 447 $ 466 Depreciation and amortization expense from operations related to property, plant and equipment was $154 million, $158 million and $169 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The above amounts include amortization expense on assets under finance leases and other financing obligations of $57 million, $62 million and $49 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Finance leases and other financing obligations are comprised primarily of land and buildings and information and communication equipment.
See Note 5 “Leases” for further information on finance leases.
9.
Fair Value Measurements Nielsen’s financial instruments include cash and cash equivalents, investments, long-term debt and derivative financial instruments.
These financial instruments potentially subject Nielsen to concentrations of credit risk.
To minimize the risk of credit loss, these financial instruments are primarily held with acknowledged financial institutions.
The carrying value of Nielsen’s financial instruments approximate fair value, except for differences with respect to long-term, fixed and variable-rate debt.
The fair value of financial instruments is generally determined by reference to market values resulting from trading on a national securities exchange or in an over-the-counter market.
In cases where quoted market prices are not available, fair value is based on estimates using present value or other valuation techniques.
Cash equivalents have original maturities of three months or less.
In addition, the Company has accounts receivable that are not collateralized.
The Connect and Media segments service high quality clients dispersed across many geographic areas.
The Company analyzes the aging of accounts receivable, historical bad debts, customer creditworthiness and current economic trends in determining the allowance for doubtful accounts.
93 Investments include investments in affiliates and a trading asset portfolio maintained to generate returns to offset changes in certain liabilities related to deferred compensation arrangements.
Nielsen assesses declines in the value of individual investments to determine whether such decline is other than temporary and thus the investment is impaired by considering available evidence.
No impairment charge was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received from selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
When determining fair value, the Company considers the principal or most advantageous market in which the Company would transact, and also considers assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the asset or liability, such as inherent risk, transfer restrictions, and risk of non-performance.
There are three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value: Level 1: Quoted market prices available in active markets for identical assets or liabilities as of the reporting date.
Level 2: Pricing inputs other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1, which are either directly or indirectly observable as of the reporting date.
Level 3: Pricing inputs that are generally unobservable and may not be corroborated by market data.
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured on a Recurring Basis The Company’s financial assets and liabilities are measured and recorded at fair value, except for equity method investments and long-term debt.
Financial assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurements.
The Company’s assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurements requires judgment, and may affect the valuation of the assets and liabilities being measured and their placement within the fair value hierarchy.
In addition, the Company records changes in the fair value of equity investments with readily determinable fair values in net income rather than in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss).
Investments that do not have readily determinable fair values are recognized at cost minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer.
The adjustments related to the observable price changes will also be recognized in net income.
The following table summarizes the valuation of the Company’s material financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of December 31, 2020 and 2019: December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Assets: Plan assets for deferred compensation (1) $ 27 $ 27 $ — $ — Investment in mutual funds (2) 2 2 — — Interest rate swap arrangements (3) — — — — Total $ 29 $ 29 $ — $ — Liabilities: Interest rate swap arrangements (3) $ 52 $ — $ 52 $ — Deferred compensation liabilities (4) 27 27 — — Total $ 79 $ 27 $ 52 $ — 94 December 31, 2019 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Assets: Plan assets for deferred compensation (1) $ 26 $ 26 $ — $ — Investment in mutual funds (2) 2 2 — — Interest rate swap arrangements (3) — — — — — Total $ 28 $ 28 $ — $ — Liabilities: Interest rate swap arrangements (3) $ 22 $ — $ 22 $ — Deferred compensation liabilities (4) 26 26 — — Total $ 48 $ 26 $ 22 $ — (1) Plan assets are comprised of investments in mutual funds, which are intended to fund liabilities arising from deferred compensation plans.
These investments are carried at fair value, which is based on quoted market prices at period end in active markets.
These investments are classified as equity securities with any gains or losses resulting from changes in fair value recorded in other income/(expense), net in the condensed consolidated statement of operations.
(2) Investments in mutual funds are money-market accounts held with the intention of funding certain specific retirement plans.
(3) Derivative financial instruments include interest rate swap arrangements recorded at fair value based on externally-developed valuation models that use readily observable market parameters and the consideration of counterparty risk.
(4) The Company offers certain employees the opportunity to participate in a deferred compensation plan.
A participant’s deferrals are invested in a variety of participant directed stock and bond mutual funds and are classified as equity securities.
Changes in the fair value of these securities are measured using quoted prices in active markets based on the market price per unit multiplied by the number of units held exclusive of any transaction costs.
A corresponding adjustment for changes in fair value of the equity securities is also reflected in the changes in fair value of the deferred compensation obligation.
Derivative Financial Instruments Nielsen primarily uses interest rate swap derivative instruments to manage the risk that changes in interest rates will affect the cash flows of its underlying debt obligations.
To qualify for hedge accounting, the hedging relationship must meet several conditions with respect to documentation, probability of occurrence, hedge effectiveness and reliability of measurement.
Nielsen documents the relationship between hedging instruments and hedged items, as well as its risk management objective and strategy for undertaking various hedge transactions as well as the hedge effectiveness assessment, both at the hedge inception and on an ongoing basis.
Nielsen recognizes all derivatives at fair value either as assets or liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets and changes in the fair values of such instruments are recognized currently in earnings unless specific hedge accounting criteria are met.
If specific cash flow hedge accounting criteria are met, Nielsen recognizes the changes in fair value of these instruments in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss).
Nielsen manages exposure to possible defaults on derivative financial instruments by monitoring the concentration of risk that Nielsen has with any individual bank and through the use of minimum credit quality standards for all counterparties.
Nielsen does not require collateral or other security in relation to derivative financial instruments.
A derivative contract entered into between Nielsen or certain of its subsidiaries and a counterparty that was also a lender under Nielsen’s senior secured credit facilities at the time the derivative contract was entered into is guaranteed under the senior secured credit facilities by Nielsen and certain of its subsidiaries (see Note 12 – (“Long-term Debt and Other Financing Arrangements”) for more information).
Since it is Nielsen’s policy to only enter into derivative contracts with banks of internationally acknowledged standing, Nielsen considers the counterparty risk to be remote.
It is Nielsen’s policy to have an International Swaps and Derivatives Association (“ISDA”) Master Agreement established with every bank with which it has entered into any derivative contract.
Under each of these ISDA Master Agreements, Nielsen agrees to settle only the net amount of the combined market values of all derivative contracts outstanding with any one counterparty should that counterparty default.
Certain of the ISDA Master Agreements contain cross-default provisions where if the Company either defaults in payment obligations under its credit facility or if such obligations are accelerated by the lenders, then the Company could also be declared in default on its derivative obligations.
At December 31, 2020, Nielsen had no material exposure to potential economic losses due to counterparty credit default risk or cross-default risk on its derivative financial instruments.
95 Interest Rate Risk Nielsen is exposed to cash flow interest rate risk on the floating-rate U.S. Dollar and Euro Term Loans, and uses floating-to-fixed interest rate swaps to hedge this exposure.
For these derivatives, Nielsen reports the after-tax gain or loss from the effective portion of the hedge as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) and reclassifies it into earnings in the same period or periods in which the hedged transaction affects earnings, and within the same income statement line item as the impact of the hedged transaction.
In May 2019, the Company entered into a $150 million aggregate notional amount four-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of July 9, 2019.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate-debt at an average rate of 1.82%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In March 2019, the Company entered into a $150 million aggregate notional amount four-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of April 9, 2019.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate-debt at an average rate of 2.26%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In March 2019, the Company entered into a $250 million aggregate notional amount four-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of June 9, 2019.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate-debt at an average rate of 2.07%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In May 2018, the Company entered into $250 million aggregate notional amount of a five-year interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of May 9, 2018.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 2.72%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In August 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a four-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of October 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.60%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In July 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of October 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.66%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In March 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a five-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of July 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 2.00%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had the following U.S. Dollar term loan floating-to-fixed rate outstanding interest rate swaps designated as hedges utilized in the management of its interest rate risk: Notional Amount Maturity Date $ 250,000,000 October 2021 $ 250,000,000 July 2022 $ 150,000,000 April 2023 $ 250,000,000 May 2023 $ 250,000,000 June 2023 $ 150,000,000 July 2023 96 The effect of cash flow hedge accounting on the consolidated statement of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018: Interest Expense Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 Interest expense (Location in the consolidated statement of operations in which the effects of cash flow hedges are recorded) $ 371 $ 397 $ 394 Amount of (gain)/loss reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) into income, net of tax $ 17 $ (7 ) $ (5 ) Amount of income/(loss) reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) into income as a result that a forecasted transaction is no longer probable of occurring, net of tax $ — $ — $ — Nielsen expects to recognize approximately $25 million of net pre-tax losses from accumulated other comprehensive loss to interest expense in the next 12 months associated with its interest-related derivative financial instruments.
Foreign Currency Exchange Risk During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, Nielsen recorded a net loss of $2 million and a net gain of $1 million respectively, associated with foreign currency derivative financial instruments within foreign currency exchange transactions losses, net in Nielsen’s consolidated statements of operations.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the notional amounts of the outstanding foreign currency derivative financial instruments were $68 million and $125 million, respectively.
See Note 12 – “Long-term Debt and Other Financing Arrangements” for more information on the long-term debt transactions referenced in this note.
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Balance Sheets The fair values of the Company’s derivative instruments as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows: December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 Derivatives Designated as Hedging Instruments Prepaid Expense and Other Current Accounts Payable and Other Current Other Non- Current Prepaid Expense and Other Current Accounts Payable and Other Current Other Non- Current (IN MILLIONS) Assets Liabilities Liabilities Assets Liabilities Liabilities Interest rate swaps $ — $ 4 $ 48 $ — $ — $ 22 Derivatives in Cash Flow Hedging Relationships The pre-tax effect of derivative instruments in cash flow hedging relationships for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was as follows (amounts in millions): Amount of (Gain)/Loss Amount of (Gain)/Loss Recognized in OCI Location of (Gain)/Loss Reclassified from OCI on Derivatives Reclassified from OCI into Income Derivatives in Cash Flow (Effective Portion) into Income (Effective Portion) Hedging Relationships December 31, (Effective Portion) December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 2020 2019 2018 Interest rate swaps $ 52 $ 33 $ (9 ) Interest expense $ 23 $ (9 ) $ (7 ) 97 Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Nonrecurring Basis The Company is required, on a nonrecurring basis, to adjust the carrying value for certain assets using fair value measurements.
The Company’s equity method investments, and non-financial assets, such as goodwill, intangible assets, and property, plant and equipment, are measured at fair value when there is an indicator of impairment and recorded at fair value only when an impairment charge is recognized.
During 2020, Nielsen decided to exit smaller, underperforming markets, non-core businesses and a product line and concluded that this decision represented an impairment indicator for the long-lived assets within those markets and businesses.
In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020, Nielsen identified a change in the extent to which certain self-developed software would be utilized and concluded this represented an impairment indicator.
To the extent that the carrying value of the assets exceeded the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows, we measured an impairment charge using a discounted cash flow method for estimation of the assets’ fair value.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a pre-tax non-cash impairment charge associated with amortizable intangible assets of $88 million and property, plant and equipment of $8 million.
Other indefinite-lived intangible assets are each tested for impairment on an annual basis and whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such asset may not be recoverable.
The impairment test for other indefinite-lived intangible assets consists of a comparison of the fair value of the intangible asset with its carrying amount.
If the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess.
The estimates of fair value of trade names and trademarks are determined using a “relief from royalty” discounted cash flow valuation methodology.
Significant assumptions inherent in this methodology include estimates of royalty rates and discount rates.
Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the respective intangible assets.
The discount rates we used in our 2020 evaluation were between 12.1% and 13.35%.
Assumptions about royalty rates are based on the rates at which comparable trade names and trademarks are being licensed in the marketplace.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a pre-tax non-cash impairment charge associated with the indefinite -lived intangible asset within our Connect segment of $88 million.
The nonrecurring fair value amount (as measured at the time of the adjustment) for the indefinite-lived tradename remeasured to fair value on a nonrecurring basis during the fiscal year and still held at December 31, 2020 was $1,130 million.
The Company did not measure any other material non-financial assets or liabilities at fair value during the year ended December 31, 2019.
10.
Restructuring Activities Optimization Initiatives In June, 2020, Nielsen announced a broad-based optimization plan to drive permanent cost savings and operational efficiencies, as well as to position the Company for greater profitability and growth.
The plan was substantially completed in 2020.
Nielsen incurred $144 million of restructuring charges in the year ended December 31, 2020.
These charges mostly represent severance costs related to employee separation packages.
The amounts are calculated based on salary levels and past service periods.
Severance costs are generally charged to earnings when planned employee terminations are approved.
98 A summary of the changes in the liabilities for restructuring activities is provided below: Total (IN MILLIONS) Initiatives Balance at December 31, 2017 $ 58 Charges 139 Non cash charges and other adjustments (2 ) Payments (127 ) Balance at December 31, 2018 68 Reclassification of ASC 420 real estate restructuring to right-of -use asset (1) (22 ) Charges 62 Non cash charges and other adjustments 1 Payments (74 ) Balance at December 31, 2019 35 Charges (2) 131 Non cash charges and other adjustments (2 ) Payments (100 ) Balance at December 31, 2020 $ 64 (1) Upon adoption of ASC 842, the real estate operating lease ASC 420 liabilities were reclassified and presented as a reduction of the related operating lease right-of-use asset.
(2) Excludes charges related to operating lease right-of-use assets of $13 million.
Includes $7 million of adjustments related to changes in a plan to exit a business.
Of the $64 million in remaining liabilities for restructuring actions, $58 million is expected to be paid within one year and is classified as a current liability within the consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020.
11.
Pensions and Other Post-Retirement Benefits Nielsen sponsors both funded and unfunded defined benefit pension plans (the “Pension Plans”) and post-retirement medical plans for some if its employees in the U.S. and other international locations.
Pension costs, in respect of defined benefit pension plans, primarily represent the increase in the actuarial present value of the obligation for pension benefits based on employee service during the year and the interest on this obligation in respect of employee service in previous years, net of the expected return on plan assets.
Differences between this expected return and the actual return on these plan assets and actuarial changes are not recognized in the statement of operations, unless the accumulated differences and changes exceed a certain threshold.
Nielsen recognizes obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension plans as expenses in the statement of operations as they are incurred.
The determination of benefit obligations and expenses is based on actuarial models.
In order to measure benefit costs and obligations using these models, critical assumptions are made with regard to the discount rate, the expected return on plan assets and the assumed rate of compensation increases.
Nielsen provides retiree medical benefits to a limited number of participants in the U.S.
Therefore, retiree medical care cost trend rates are not a significant driver of our post retirement costs.
Management reviews these critical assumptions at least annually.
Other assumptions involve demographic factors such as turnover, retirement and mortality rates.
Management reviews these assumptions periodically and updates them as necessary.
The discount rate is the rate at which the benefit obligations could be effectively settled.
For Nielsen’s U.S. plans, the discount rate is based on a bond portfolio that includes only long-term bonds with an Aa rating, or equivalent, from a major rating agency.
For the non-U.S. plans, the discount rate is set by reference to market yields on high-quality corporate bonds.
Nielsen believes the timing and amount of cash flows related to the bonds in these portfolios are expected to match the estimated payment benefit streams of our plans.
The Company uses the spot rate approach to calculate the discount rate for its retirement benefit plans.
Under the spot-rate approach, the Company uses individual spot rates along the yield curve that correspond with the timing of each future cash outflow for benefit payments in order to calculate interest cost and service cost within net periodic benefit costs.
To determine the expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets, Nielsen considers, for each country, the structure of the asset portfolio and the expected rates of return for each of the components.
For Nielsen’s U.S. plans, a 50 basis point decrease in 99 the expected return on assets would increase pension expense on our principal plans by approximately $1 million per year.
The Company assumed that the weighted-averages of long-term returns on our pension plans were 4.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020, 4.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 4.4% for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The expected long-term rate of return is applied to the fair value of pension plan assets.
The actual return on plan assets will vary year to year from this assumption.
Although the actual return on plan assets will vary from year to year, it is appropriate to use long-term expected forecasts in selecting Nielsen’s expected return on plan assets.
As such, there can be no assurance that the Company’s actual return on plan assets will approximate the long-term expected forecasts.
The actuarial losses on the benefit obligation during 2020 were approximately $114 million.
This consists of a $123 million loss due to changes in financial assumptions, with the primary driver being a reduction in discount rates in most countries.
This loss was partially offset by a gain of $5 million due to updated demographic experience and a gain of $4 million related to changes in mortality tables.
During 2019, certain of the Company’s pension plans contracted with insurance companies and transferred $632 million of outstanding defined benefit pension obligations and related pension assets for approximately 6,000 retirees and beneficiaries in the Netherlands and UK to the insurance companies.
The insurance companies are now required to pay and administer the retirement benefits owed to these retirees and beneficiaries.
These transactions have no impact on the amount, timing, or form of the monthly retirement benefit payments to the covered retirees and beneficiaries.
These transactions resulted in a non-cash charge to other income/expense of $170 million in our consolidated statements of operations and did not impact cash flows in 2019.
100 A summary of the activity for the Pension Plans follows: Year Ended December 31, 2020 United (IN MILLIONS) States Other Total Change in projected benefit obligation Benefit obligation at beginning of period $ 378 $ 718 $ 1,096 Service cost — 11 11 Interest cost 11 13 24 Plan participants’ contributions — 1 1 Actuarial (gain)/loss 46 68 114 Benefits paid (16 ) (25 ) (41 ) Settlements — (12 ) (12 ) Other — 56 56 Effect of foreign currency translation — 44 44 Benefit obligation at end of period 419 874 1,293 Change in plan assets Fair value of plan assets at beginning of period 270 631 901 Actual return on plan assets 40 53 93 Employer contributions 11 26 37 Plan participants’ contributions — 1 1 Benefits paid (16 ) (25 ) (41 ) Settlements — (12 ) (12 ) Other — 17 17 Effect of foreign currency translation — 37 37 Fair value of plan assets at end of period 305 728 1,033 Funded status $ (114 ) $ (146 ) $ (260 ) Amounts recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheets Pension assets included in other non-current assets — 29 29 Current liabilities — (3 ) (3 ) Accrued benefit liability included in other non-current liabilities (114 ) (172 ) (286 ) Net amount recognized $ (114 ) $ (146 ) $ (260 ) Amounts recognized in Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss), before tax Net (gain)/loss $ 23 $ 47 $ 70 Settlement loss — (1 ) (1 ) Amortization of net loss (11 ) (6 ) (17 ) Total recognized in other comprehensive (income)/loss $ 12 $ 40 $ 52 Amounts not yet reflected in net periodic benefit cost and included in 
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss), before tax Unrecognized losses $ 135 $ 203 $ 338 101 Year Ended December 31, 2019 The United (IN MILLIONS) Netherlands States Other Total Change in projected benefit obligation Benefit obligation at beginning of period $ 647 $ 338 $ 613 $ 1,598 Service cost 3 — 4 7 Interest cost 9 14 13 36 Plan participants’ contributions — — 1 1 Actuarial (gain)/loss 42 43 71 156 Benefits paid (29 ) (17 ) (24 ) (70 ) Settlements (573 ) — (59 ) (632 ) Curtailments (3 ) — — (3 ) Amendments — — 1 1 Effect of foreign currency translation (14 ) — 16 2 Benefit obligation at end of period 82 378 636 1,096 Change in plan assets Fair value of plan assets at beginning of period 637 231 528 1,396 Actual return on plan assets 50 46 80 176 Employer contributions 4 10 14 28 Plan participants’ contributions — — 1 1 Benefits paid (29 ) (17 ) (24 ) (70 ) Settlements (573 ) — (59 ) (632 ) Effect of foreign currency translation (14 ) — 16 2 Fair value of plan assets at end of period 75 270 556 901 Funded status $ (7 ) $ (108 ) $ (80 ) $ (195 ) Amounts recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheets Pension assets included in other non-current assets — — 26 26 Current liabilities — — (2 ) (2 ) Accrued benefit liability included in other non-current liabilities (7 ) (108 ) (104 ) (219 ) Net amount recognized $ (7 ) $ (108 ) $ (80 ) $ (195 ) Amounts recognized in Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss), before tax Net (gain)/loss $ 5 $ 15 $ 15 $ 35 Settlement loss (164 ) — (6 ) (170 ) Curtailment gain recognized 1 — — 1 Amortization of net loss (5 ) (6 ) (2 ) (13 ) Total recognized in other comprehensive income/(loss) $ (163 ) $ 9 $ 7 $ (147 ) Amounts not yet reflected in net periodic benefit cost and included in 
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss), before tax Unrecognized losses $ 27 $ 123 $ 136 $ 286 The total accumulated benefit obligation and minimum liability changes for the Pension Plans were as follows: Year Ended Year Ended Year Ended December 31, December 31, December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 Accumulated benefit obligation.
$ 1,254 $ 1,078 $ 1,579 102 Pension Plans with Accumulated Benefit Obligation in Excess of Plan Assets at December 31, 2020 United (IN MILLIONS) States Other Total Accumulated benefit obligation $ 419 $ 662 $ 1,081 Fair value of plan assets 305 524 829 Pension Plans with Projected Benefit Obligation in Excess of Plan Assets at December 31, 2020 United (IN MILLIONS) States Other Total Projected benefit obligation $ 419 $ 704 $ 1,123 Fair value of plan assets 305 529 834 Pension Plans with Accumulated Benefit Obligation in Excess of Plan Assets at December 31, 2019 The United (IN MILLIONS) Netherlands States Other Total Accumulated benefit obligation $ 83 $ 378 $ 414 $ 875 Fair value of plan assets 75 270 323 668 Pension Plans with Projected Benefit Obligation in Excess of Plan Assets at December 31, 2019 The United (IN MILLIONS) Netherlands States Other Total Projected benefit obligation $ 83 $ 378 $ 483 $ 944 Fair value of plan assets 75 270 378 723 Net periodic benefit costs for the year ended December 31, 2020, includes the following components: United (IN MILLIONS) States Other Total Year ended December 31, 2020 Service cost $ — $ 11 $ 11 Interest cost 11 13 24 Expected return on plan assets (17 ) (20 ) (37 ) Settlement loss recognized — 1 1 Amortization of net loss 11 6 17 Net periodic pension cost $ 5 $ 11 $ 16 103 Net periodic benefit cost for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, includes the following components: The United (IN MILLIONS) Netherlands States Other Total Year ended December 31, 2019 Service cost $ 3 $ — $ 4 $ 7 Interest cost 9 14 13 36 Expected return on plan assets (20 ) (17 ) (21 ) (58 ) Settlement loss recognized 164 — 6 170 Curtailment gain recognized (1 ) — — (1 ) Amortization of net loss 5 6 2 13 Net periodic pension cost $ 160 $ 3 $ 4 $ 167 Year ended December 31, 2018 Service cost $ 3 $ — $ 6 $ 9 Interest cost 10 12 13 35 Expected return on plan assets (23 ) (17 ) (21 ) (61 ) Settlement loss recognized — — 1 1 Amortization of prior service costs — — (1 ) (1 ) Amortization of net loss 6 9 4 19 Net periodic pension cost $ (4 ) $ 4 $ 2 $ 2 The non-cash settlement loss of $170 million in 2019 resulted from the transfer of defined benefit pension obligations and related assets in the Netherlands ($164 million) and the UK ($6 million) to insurance companies which relieved Nielsen of its obligations related to the plans.
Actuarial gains and losses are amortized over the average remaining service lives for plans with active participants, and over the average remaining lives for legacy plans with no active participants.
The weighted average assumptions underlying the pension computations were as follows: Year Ended December 31, 2020 2019 2018 US Other NL US Other NL US Other Pension benefit obligation: —discount rate 2.5% 1.5% 1.5% 3.4% 1.9% 2.0% 4.4% 2.5% —rate of compensation increase — 1.3% — — 1.1% 1.8% — 1.1% Net periodic pension costs: —discount rate 3.4% 1.8% 2.0% 4.4% 2.5% 1.9% 3.7% 2.3% —rate of compensation increase — 1.0% 1.8% — 1.1% 1.8% — 1.1% —expected long-term return on plan assets 6.5% 3.9% 3.5% 6.7% 4.2% 3.6% 6.9% 4.3% The assumptions for the expected return on plan assets for the Pension Plans were based on a review of the historical returns of the asset classes in which the assets of the Pension Plans are invested and long-term economic forecast for the type of investments held by the plans.
The historical returns on these asset classes were weighted based on the expected long-term allocation of the assets of the Pension Plans.
104 Nielsen’s pension plans’ weighted average asset allocations by asset category are as follows: United States Other Total At December 31, 2020 Equity securities 57 % 51 % 54 % Fixed income securities 43 38 39 Other — 11 7 Total 100 % 100 % 100 % The United Netherlands States Other Total At December 31, 2019 Equity securities 39 % 54 % 50 % 51 % Fixed income securities 53 45 39 43 Other 8 1 11 6 Total 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % No Nielsen shares are held by the Pension Plans.
Nielsen’s primary objective with regard to the investment of the Pension Plans’ assets is to ensure that in each individual plan, sufficient funds are available to satisfy future benefit obligations.
For this purpose, asset and liability management studies are made periodically at each pension fund.
For each of the Pension Plans, an appropriate mix is determined on the basis of the outcome of these studies, taking into account the national rules and regulations.
The overall target asset allocation among all plans for 2020 was 53% equity securities and 40% long-term interest-earning investments (debt or fixed income securities), and 7% other investments.
Equity securities primarily include investments in U.S. and non U.S. companies.
Fixed income securities include corporate bonds of companies from diversified industries and mortgage-backed securities.
Real estate contracts are categorized as level 3 and are valued based on contractual terms.
Assets at fair value (See Note 9 – “Fair Value Measurements” for additional information on fair value measurement and the underlying fair value hierarchy) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows: (IN MILLIONS) December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 Asset Category Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Cash and equivalents $ 25 $ — $ — $ 25 $ 11 $ — $ — $ 11 Equity securities – U.S. 79 7 — 86 75 4 — 79 Equity securities – Global.
41 148 — 189 36 115 — 151 Equity securities – non-U.S. 5 108 — 113 9 80 — 89 Real estate — 2 17 19 — — 22 22 Corporate bonds 121 92 — 213 112 80 — 192 Debt issued by national, state or local government 28 42 — 70 38 39 — 77 Other — 7 — 7 — 6 — 6 Total assets at fair value, excluding NAV per share practical expedient at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 $ 299 $ 406 $ 17 $ 722 $ 281 $ 324 $ 22 $ 627 105 The following presents our total fair value of plan assets including the NAV per share practical expedient: (IN MILLIONS) December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 Fair value of investments, excluding NAV per share practical expedient.
$ 722 $ 627 Fair value of investments, using NAV per share practical Expedient Asset Category Cash $ 8 $ 6 Equity securities – U.S. 32 30 Equity securities – Global.
41 40 Debt issued by national, state or local government 4 10 Liability driven investments 111 76 Real estate 4 5 Private equity and hedge funds 74 73 Insurance and other 37 34 Total assets at fair value including NAV per share practical expedient at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 $ 1,033 $ 901 The following is a summary of changes in the fair value of the Pension Plans’ Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019: (IN MILLIONS) Real Estate Other Total Balance, end of year December 31, 2018 $ 42 $ 132 $ 174 Actual return on plan assets: (Sales)/investments (2 ) — (2 ) 

Settlements (18 ) (130 ) (148 ) Effect of foreign currency translation — (2 ) (2 ) Balance, end of year December 31, 2019 $ 22 $ — $ 22 Actual return on plan assets: (Sales)/Investments (7 ) — (7 ) Effect of foreign currency translation 2 — 2 Balance, end of year December 31, 2020 $ 17 $ — $ 17 Real estate investment valuations require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted market prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the long-term nature of such assets.
These assets are initially valued at cost and are reviewed periodically utilizing available and relevant market data to determine if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted.
The valuation methodology is applied consistently from period to period.
Contributions to the Pension Plans in 2021 are expected to be approximately $10 million for the U.S. plan and $22 million for other plans.
Estimated future benefit payments are as follows: United (IN MILLIONS) States Other Total For the years ending December 31, 2021 $ 17 $ 29 $ 46 2022 17 29 46 2023 18 30 48 2024 19 32 51 2025 19 34 53 2026-2030 103 189 292 106 Defined Contribution Plans Nielsen also offers defined contribution plans to certain participants, primarily in the U.S. Nielsen’s expense related to these plans was $35 million, $54 million and $59 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
In the U.S., Nielsen contributes cash to each employee’s account in an amount up to 3% of compensation (subject to IRS limitations).
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the defined contribution company matching was suspended in the U.S. effective May 9, 2020 through December 31, 2020, resulting in a significant reduction in the expense related to such plans.
No contributions are made in shares of the Company’s common stock.
12.
Long-term Debt and Other Financing Arrangements Unless otherwise stated, interest rates are as of December 31, 2020.
December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 Weighted Weighted Interest Carrying Fair Interest Carrying Fair (IN MILLIONS) Rate Amount Value Rate Amount Value $1,125 million Senior secured term loan (LIBOR based variable rate of 1.90%) due 2023 $ 1,050 $ 1,045 $ 1,086 $ 1,079 $2,303 million Senior secured term loan (LIBOR based variable rate of 2.15%) due 2023 2,239 2,236 2,263 2,273 €545 million Senior secured term loan (Euro LIBOR based variable rate of 2.50%) due 2023 359 357 603 606 €660 million Senior secured term loan (Euro LIBOR based variable rate of 3.75%) due 2025 789 805 — — $550 million Senior secured term loan (LIBOR based variable rate of 4.75%) due 2025 534 550 — — $850 million Senior secured revolving credit facility (Euro LIBOR or LIBOR based variable rate) due 2023 — — — — Total senior secured credit facilities (with weighted-average interest rate) 2.95 % 4,971 4,993 3.52 % 3,952 3,958 $800 million 4.500% senior debenture loan due 2020 — — 799 802 $425 million 5.500% senior debenture loan due 2021 150 151 622 629 $2,300 million 5.000% senior debenture loan due 2022 824 828 2,293 2,312 $500 million 5.000% senior debenture loan due 2025 497 514 497 516 $1,000 million 5.625% senior debenture loan due 2028 985 1,088 — — $750 million 5.875% senior debenture loan due 2030 739 846 — — Total debenture loans (with weighted-average interest rate) 5.69 % 3,195 3,427 5.22 % 4,211 4,259 Other loans — — 1 1 Total long-term debt 4.02 % 8,166 8,420 4.40 % 8,164 8,218 Finance lease and other financing obligations 141 145 Total debt and other financing arrangements 8,307 8,309 Less: Current portion of long-term debt, finance lease and other financing obligations and other short-term borrowings 293 914 Non-current portion of long-term debt and finance lease and other financing obligations $ 8,014 $ 7,395 The fair value of the Company’s long-term debt instruments was based on the yield on public debt where available or current borrowing rates available for financings with similar terms and maturities and such fair value measurements are considered Level 1or Level 2 in nature, respectively.
107 The carrying value of Nielsen’s long-term debt are denominated in the following currencies: December 31, December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 U.S.
Dollars $ 7,018 $ 7,561 Euro 1,148 603 $ 8,166 $ 8,164 Annual maturities of Nielsen’s long-term debt are as follows: (IN MILLIONS) 2021 $ 224 2022 $ 915 2023 $ 3,486 2024 $ 10 2025(1) $ 1,793 Thereafter $ 1,738 $ 8,166 (1) If the existing €545 million senior secured term loan and $2,303 million senior secured term loan have not been repaid or refinanced (subject to additional limitations in the Credit Agreement) on or prior to the date that is 91 days prior to October 4, 2023, the €660 million senior secured loan and $550 million senior secured loan are due on October 4, 2023.
Senior Secured Credit Facilities 
 In June 2020, Nielsen entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) that provides for: (i) a new dollar term loan facility, the “Dollar Term B-5 Loans” having commitments in an aggregate principal amount of $550 million and (ii) a new euro term loan facility, the “Euro Term B-3 Loans” in an aggregate principal amount of €420 million.
On June 4, 2020, Nielsen borrowed the full amount of the Dollar Term B-5 Loans and the Euro Term B-3 Loans.
The proceeds of the Dollar Term B-5 Loans and Euro Term B-3 Loans were used to redeem all of the $800 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of the 4.500% Notes due 2020 and redeem $200 million of the $625 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of Nielsen’s 5.500% Senior Notes due 2021.
The partial redemption of the 5.500% Notes resulted in $425 million aggregate principal amount of 2021 Notes remaining outstanding.
The Dollar Term B-5 Loans and the Euro Term B-3 Loans will mature in full on the earlier of (i) June 4, 2025 and (ii) if the existing Class B Term Loans incurred pursuant to and as defined in the Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of June 29, 2018 (the “Existing Credit Agreement”) have not been repaid or refinanced (subject to additional limitations in the Credit Agreement) on or prior to the date that is 91 days prior to October 4, 2023, on October 4, 2023.
The Dollar Term B-5 Loans bear interest at a rate per annum equal to, at the election of Nielsen, (i) a base rate or eurocurrency rate, plus (ii) an applicable margin of 2.75%, in the case of base rate loans, and 3.75%, in the case of eurocurrency rate loans.
The Euro Term B-3 Loans bear interest at a rate per annum equal to (i) a eurocurrency rate plus (ii) an applicable margin of 3.75%.
The Credit Agreement contains substantially the same affirmative and negative covenants as those of the Existing Credit Agreement, however, the Credit Agreement expressly permits actions in connection with and resulting in the disposition of Nielsen Global Connect, including by way of a spin-off of the Connect Business, as previously announced by Nielsen.
The obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured on a pari passu basis with the obligations under the Existing Credit Agreement.
Nielsen wrote-off certain previously deferred financing fees of $1 million associated with the June 2020 debt refinancing and capitalized certain fees in connection with the refinancing of $9 million.
In July, 2020, Nielsen entered into Amendment No.
1 (“Amendment No.
1”) to the Credit Agreement.
Pursuant to Amendment No.
1, Nielsen incurred new Euro Term B-3 Loans in an aggregate principal amount of €240 million (the “Incremental Euro Term B-3 Loans”), thereby increasing the outstanding amount of existing Euro Term B-3 Loans under the Credit Agreement, as amended by Amendment No.
1, to approximately €660 million.
The proceeds of the Incremental Euro Term B-3 Loans were used by Nielsen to prepay the €545 million Senior secured term loan due 2023 under the Existing Credit Agreement in an aggregate principal amount of €240 million and all accrued interest and expenses.
108 

The Incremental Euro Term B-3 Loans are subject to the same terms, maturity date and interest rate as the existing Euro Term B-3 Loans.
The Incremental Euro Term B-3 Loans are subject to customary affirmative and negative covenants and events of default.
In July, 2020, Nielsen entered into the Sixth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Amendment Agreement”) amending and restating the Existing Credit Agreement.
The modifications in the agreement primarily conform the covenants and certain other terms to the terms of the Credit Agreement.
The Amendment Agreement expressly permits actions in connection with and resulting in the disposition of Nielsen Global Connect, including by way of a spin-off of the Connect Business, as previously announced by Nielsen.
Nielsen wrote-off certain previously deferred financing fees and incurred new fees as part of the July financings of $3 million and capitalized certain fees in connection with the July financings of $5 million.
Debenture Loans 

The indentures governing the Senior Notes limit the majority of Nielsen’s subsidiaries’ ability to incur additional indebtedness, pay dividends or make other distributions or repurchase its capital stock, make certain investments, enter into certain types of transactions with affiliates, use assets as security in other transactions and sell certain assets or merge with or into other companies subject to certain exceptions.
Upon a change in control, Nielsen is required under each indenture to make an offer to redeem all of the Senior Notes issued pursuant to such indenture at a redemption price equal to the 101% of the aggregate principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The Senior Notes are jointly and severally guaranteed by Nielsen, substantially all of the wholly owned material U.S. subsidiaries of Nielsen and certain of the non-U.S. wholly-owned subsidiaries of Nielsen.
In September, 2020, Nielsen issued $1 billion aggregate principal amount of 5.625% Senior Notes due 2028 (the “2028 Notes”), which mature on October 1, 2028 at par and $750 million aggregate principal amount of its 5.875% Senior Notes due 2030 (the “2030 Notes” and together with the 2028 Notes, the “Notes”), which mature on October 1, 2030 at par.
Nielsen capitalized certain fees in connection with the refinancing of $27 million.
Nielsen will pay interest on the 2028 Notes at a rate of 5.625% per annum and on the 2030 Notes at a rate of 5.875% per annum, in each case semiannually on the interest payment dates provided in the applicable indenture governing such series of Senior Notes.
Concurrent with this issuance Nielsen called for partial redemption of $275 million of the $425 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of the 5.500% Senior Notes due 2021 (the “2021 Notes”) effective October 9, 2020, $725 million of the $2,300 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of the 5.000% Senior Notes due 2022 effective October 9, 2020 (the “2022 Notes”) and $750 million of the $2,300 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes effective October 10, 2020, in each case at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of such notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon to, but excluding, the applicable partial redemption date.
Nielsen wrote-off certain previously deferred financing fees of $4 million in connection with the October 2020 redemptions.
Covenants The Amendment Agreement and the Credit Agreement, as amended by Amendment No.
1 (together the “Secured Credit Agreements”) contain a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict, subject to certain exceptions, the ability of Nielsen Holding and Finance B.V. and its restricted subsidiaries (which together constitute most of Nielsen’s subsidiaries) to incur additional indebtedness or guarantees, incur liens and engage in sale and leaseback transactions, make certain loans and investments, declare dividends, make payments or redeem or repurchase capital stock, engage in certain mergers, acquisitions and other business combinations, prepay, redeem or purchase certain indebtedness, amend or otherwise alter terms of certain indebtedness, sell certain assets, transact with affiliates, enter into agreements limiting subsidiary distributions and alter the business they conduct.
These entities are restricted, subject to certain exceptions, in their ability to transfer their net assets to Nielsen.
Such restricted net assets amounted to approximately $1.9 billion at December 31, 2020.
The Amendment Agreement contains a total leverage covenant that requires the Covenant Parties (as defined in the Amendment Agreement) maintain a ratio of Consolidated Total Net Debt (as defined in the Amendment Agreement) to Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the Amendment Agreement) at or below 5.50 to 1.00, measured at the end of each calendar quarter for the four quarters most recently ended.
Neither Nielsen nor TNC B.V. is currently bound by any financial or negative covenants contained in the Secured Credit Agreements.
The Secured Credit Agreements also contain certain customary affirmative covenants and events of default.
Certain significant financial covenants are described further below.
Failure to comply with the financial covenant described above would result in an event of default under Nielsen’s Amendment Agreement unless waived by certain of Nielsen’s term lenders and Nielsen’s revolving lenders.
An event of default under Nielsen’s Amendment Agreement can result in the acceleration of Nielsen’s indebtedness under the facilities thereunder, which in turn would result in an event of default and possible acceleration of indebtedness under the Credit Agreement, as amended by Amendment No.
1, 109 and the agreements governing Nielsen’s debt securities as well.
As Nielsen’s failure to comply with the financial covenant described above can cause Nielsen to go into default under the agreements governing Nielsen’s indebtedness, management believes that Nielsen’s Amendment Agreement and this covenant are material to Nielsen.
As of December 31, 2020, Nielsen was in full compliance with the financial covenant described above.
Pursuant to the terms of Nielsen’s Secured Credit Agreements, Nielsen is subject to making mandatory prepayments on the term loans outstanding thereunder to the extent in any full calendar year Nielsen generates Excess Cash Flow (“ECF”), as defined in the Secured Credit Agreements.
The percentage of ECF that must be applied as a repayment under either Secured Credit Agreement is a function of several factors, including Nielsen’s ratio of total net debt to Covenant EBITDA, as well other adjustments, including any voluntary term loan repayments and permanent reductions of revolving credit commitments made in the course of the calendar year.
To the extent any mandatory repayment is required pursuant to this ECF clause; such payment must generally occur on or around the time of the delivery of the annual consolidated financial statements to the applicable lenders.
At December 31, 2020, Nielsen’s ratio of total net debt to Covenant EBITDA was less than 5.00 to 1.00 and therefore no mandatory repayment was required.
Nielsen’s next ECF measurement date will occur upon completion of the 2021 results, and although Nielsen do not expect to be required to issue any mandatory repayments in 2021 or beyond, it is uncertain at this time if any such payments will be required in future periods.
Revolving Credit Facility The Amendment Agreement contains a senior secured revolving credit facility with aggregate revolving credit commitments of $850 million and a final maturity of July 2023 under which Nielsen Finance LLC, TNC (US) Holdings, Inc., and Nielsen Holding and Finance B.V. can borrow revolving loans.
The revolving credit facility can also be used for letters of credit, guarantees and swingline loans.
The senior secured revolving credit facility is provided under the Amendment Agreement and so contains covenants and restrictions as noted above with respect to the Amendment Agreement.
Obligations under the revolving credit facility are guaranteed by the same entities that guarantee obligations under the Amendment Agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, Nielsen had zero borrowings outstanding and outstanding letters of credit of $18 million.
As of December 31, 2019, Nielsen had zero borrowings outstanding and outstanding letters of credit of $17 million.
As of December 31, 2020, Nielsen had $832 million available for borrowing under the revolving credit facility.
Other Transactions Effective July 1, 2010, the Company designated its Euro denominated variable rate senior secured term loans as non-derivative hedges of its net investment in a European subsidiary.
Gains or losses attributable to fluctuations in the Euro as compared to the U.S. Dollar associated with this debenture were recorded to the cumulative translation adjustment within shareholders’ equity, net of income tax.
Debt-Issuance Costs The costs related to the issuance of debt are presented as a deduction from the corresponding debt liability and amortized to interest expense using the effective interest method over the life of the related debt.
Finance Lease and Other Obligations Nielsen finances certain computer equipment, software, buildings and automobiles under finance leases and related transactions.
These arrangements do not include terms of renewal, purchase options, or escalation clauses.
Assets under finance lease are recorded within property, plant and equipment.
See Note 8 “Property, Plant and Equipment.” Liabilities under finance leases are recorded within long-term debt and other financing obligations above.
See Note 5 “Leases” for more information on finance leases and other financing obligations referenced in this note.
110 13.
Shareholders’ Equity Common stock activity is as follows: Year Ended December 31, 2020 2019 2018 Actual number of shares of common stock outstanding Beginning of period 356,149,883 355,271,737 355,944,976 Shares of common stock issued through compensation plans 1,519,384 835,057 1,587,947 Employee benefit trust activity (24,332 ) 43,089 (41,030 ) Repurchases of common stock - - (2,220,156 ) End of period 357,644,935 356,149,883 355,271,737 On January 31, 2013, the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board”) adopted a cash dividend policy to pay quarterly cash dividends on its outstanding common stock.
The following table represents the cash dividends declared by the Board and paid to shareholders for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Declaration Date Record Date Payment Date Dividend Per Share February 21, 2019 March 7, 2019 March 21, 2019 $ 0.35 April 18, 2019 June 5, 2019 June 19, 2019 $ 0.35 July 18, 2019 August 22, 2019 September 5, 2019 $ 0.35 November 3, 2019 November 21, 2019 December 5, 2019 $ 0.06 February 20, 2020 March 5, 2020 March 19, 2020 $ 0.06 April 16, 2020 June 4, 2020 June 18, 2020 $ 0.06 July 16, 2020 August 20, 2020 September 3, 2020 $ 0.06 October 27, 2020 November 19, 2020 December 3, 2020 $ 0.06 On February 4, 2021, the Board declared a cash dividend of $0.06 per share on Nielsen’s common stock.
The dividend is payable on March 18, 2021 to shareholders of record at the close of business on March 4, 2021.
The dividend policy and the payment of future cash dividends are subject to the discretion of the Company’s Board of Directors.
Nielsen’s Board approved a share repurchase program, as included in the below table, for up to $2 billion in the aggregate of our outstanding common stock.
The primary purpose of the program is to return value to shareholders and to mitigate dilution associated with Nielsen’s equity compensation plans.
Board Approval Share Repurchase Authorization ($ in millions) July 25, 2013 $ 500 October 23, 2014 $ 1,000 December 11, 2015 $ 500 Total Share Repurchase Authorization $ 2,000 Repurchases under this program will be made in accordance with applicable securities laws from time to time and depending on Nielsen’s evaluation of market conditions and other factors.
This program has been executed within the limitations of the authority granted Nielsen on August 6, 2015 and which has been extended by the authority approved by Nielsen's shareholders at its annual general meeting of shareholders held on May 12, 2020, which authority will expire on May 12, 2025.
As of December 31, 2020, there have been 39,426,521 shares of our common stock purchased at an average price of $44.95 per share (total consideration of approximately $1,772 million) under this program.
There were no share repurchases for the year ended December 31, 2020.
111 14.
Share-based Compensation Nielsen measures the cost of all share-based payments, including stock options, at fair value on the grant date and recognizes such costs within the consolidated statements of operations.
Nielsen recognizes the expense of its options that cliff vest using the straight-line method.
For those that vest over time, an accelerated graded vesting is used.
The Company recorded $53 million, $50 million and $35 million of expense associated with share-based compensation for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The tax benefit related to the share-based compensation expense was $5 million, $6 million and $5 million for each of the respective periods.
Nielsen has an equity-based, management compensation plan (“Equity Participation Plan” or “EPP”) to align compensation for certain key executives with the performance of the Company.
Under this plan, certain of the Company’s executives may be granted stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units and dividend equivalent rights in the shares of the Company or purchase its shares.
In connection with the completion of Nielsen’s initial public offering of common stock on January 31, 2011 (and further amended), the Company implemented the Nielsen 2010 Stock Incentive Plan (the “Prior Plan”) and suspended further grants under the EPP.
In 2019, the Company replaced the Nielsen 2010 Stock Incentive Plan with the Nielsen 2019 Stock Incentive Plan (the “Stock Incentive Plan”).
The Stock Incentive Plan is the source of new equity-based awards permitting the Company to grant to its key employees, directors and other service providers the following types of awards: incentive stock options, non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units and other awards valued in whole or in part by reference to shares of Nielsen’s common stock and performance-based awards denominated in shares or cash.
Under the Stock Incentive Plan, Nielsen granted 750,000 time-based stock options to purchase shares during the year ended December 31, 2018.
No time-based stock options to purchase shares were granted during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, the total number of shares authorized for award of options or other equity-based awards was 10,420,826 under the Stock Incentive Plan.
This includes the 7,200,000 newly authorized shares under the Stock Incentive Plan and the 3,220,826 shares reserved for issuance from the Prior Plan.
The 2018 time-based awards become exercisable over a three year vesting period at a rate of 33.3% per year on the anniversary date of the award, and are tied to the executives’ continuing employment.
The fair values of the time-based awards granted during 2018 were estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model with the expected volatility based on the Company’s historical volatility.
The following assumptions were used for the grants of time-based awards during 2018: Year Ended December 31, 2018 Expected life (years) 6.00 Risk-free interest rate 2.87 % Expected dividend yield 4.97 % Expected volatility 25.96 % Weighted average volatility 25.96 % 112 Nielsen’s stock option plan activity is summarized below: Number of Options(Time Based) Weighted-AverageExercise Price Weighted-AverageRemainingContractualTerm inYears AggregateIntrinsicValue inMillions Stock Option Plan activity Outstanding at December 31, 2017 5,869,303 $ 41.58 3.52 $ 13 Granted 750,000 40.00 Forfeited (988,826 ) 46.08 Expired options (153,799 ) 30.47 Exercised (844,842 ) 28.04 Outstanding at December 31, 2018 4,631,836 $ 43.20 3.66 $ — Granted — — Forfeited (662,732 ) 46.31 Expired options (445,760 ) 28.09 Exercised (9,027 ) 17.44 Outstanding at December 31, 2019 3,514,317 $ 44.60 3.15 $ — Granted — — Forfeited (160,668 ) 48.74 Expired options (463,507 ) 35.00 Exercised — — Outstanding at December 31, 2020 2,890,142 $ 45.91 2.55 $ — Exercisable at December 31, 2020 2,639,892 $ 46.47 2.33 $ — During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no time-based only options granted and the aggregate fair value of options vested was $3 million and $5 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2018, the weighted-average grant date fair value of the options granted was $2.16 and the aggregate fair value of options vested was $6 million.
At December 31, 2020, there was an insignificant amount of unearned share-based compensation related to stock options (net of estimated forfeitures) which the Company expects to record as share-based compensation expense over the next year.
The compensation expense related to the time-based awards is amortized over the term of the award using the graded vesting method.
The intrinsic value of the options exercised during the year ended December 31, 2020 was zero as there were no time-based options exercised.
The intrinsic value of the options exercised during the year ended December 31, 2019 was insignificant.
The intrinsic value of the options exercised during the year ended December 31, 2018 was $6 million.
Under the Nielsen Stock Incentive Plan, Nielsen granted 200,000 and 2,524,176 time and performance based stock options to purchase shares during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2018, respectively.
There were no time and performance based stock options granted during the year ended December 31, 2019.
The weighted average grant date fair value of the awards in 2020 and 2018 were $3.56 and $3.09.
The performance aspect of the award is achieved based on the performance of Nielsen’s stock price.
If the performance obligations are satisfied, the award will become exercisable over a three year vesting period at a rate of 33.3% per year on the anniversary date of the award, and are tied to the executives’ continuing employment.
As of December 31, 2020, there was approximately $1 million of unearned share-based compensation related to performance stock options (net of estimated forfeitures) which the Company expects to record as share-based compensation over the next three years.
The fair values of the granted time and performance based awards during 2020 and 2018 were estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation model with the expected volatility based on the Company’s historical volatility.
113 The following assumptions were used for grants of time and performance based awards: Year Ended December 31, 2020 2019 2018 Expected life (years) 5.00 — 5.00 Risk-free interest rate 0.49-1.34 % — 2.83-2.92 % Expected dividend yield 1.16-1.62 % — 4.85- 5.54 % Expected volatility 28.99-31.40 % — 27.11-27.27 % Weighted average volatility 30.20 % — 27.13 % Activity of Nielsen’s restricted stock units (RSUs) that are ultimately payable in shares of common stock granted under the Stock Incentive Plan is summarized below: Number of RSUs Weighted-AverageGrant Date Fair Value RSU activity Nonvested at December 31, 2017 2,088,988 $ 40.36 Granted 2,780,914 25.35 Forfeited (361,821 ) 38.46 Vested (642,397 ) 41.24 Nonvested at December 31, 2018 3,865,684 $ 29.88 Granted 2,454,871 21.46 Forfeited (692,718 ) 28.63 Vested (986,852 ) 33.60 Nonvested at December 31, 2019 4,640,985 $ 25.10 Granted 2,153,198 17.14 Forfeited (496,497) 22.59 Vested (2,025,318) 26.38 Nonvested at December 31, 2020 4,272,368 $ 20.86 The majority of the awards granted in 2020, 2019 and 2018 will vest at a rate of 6.25% per quarter over four years.
Other 2020 awards will vest at one of the following rates: 25% on the first anniversary date of the award/75% on the second anniversary date of the award, 100% on the second anniversary date of the award, 100% on the third anniversary of the award, 50% per year over two years on the anniversary date of the award, or 25% per year over four years on the anniversary date of the award.
The other 2019 awards will vest at one of the following rates: 25% on the first anniversary date of the award/75% on the second anniversary date of the award, 100% on the second anniversary date of the award, 12.5% per quarter over two years, or 25% per year over four years on the anniversary date of the award.
The other 2018 awards will vest at one of the following rates: 100% on the third anniversary date of the award, 100% on the second anniversary date of the award, 33.3% per year over three years on the anniversary date of the award, 12.5% per quarter over two years, or 25% per year over four years on the anniversary date of the award.
As of December 31, 2020, there was approximately $28 million of unearned share-based compensation related to unvested RSUs (net of estimated forfeitures) which the Company expects to record as stock-based compensation expense over a weighted average period of 2.3 years.
114 During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company granted 543,942, 523,508 and 463,442 performance restricted stock units, respectively, representing the target number of performance restricted stock subject to the award.
The weighted average grant date fair value of the awards in 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $16.08, $24.62 and $27.94 per share.
For the performance restricted stock units granted in 2020, the total number of performance restricted stock units to be earned is subject to achievement of performance goals for the period ending December 31, 2020.
For the performance restricted stock units granted in 2019, the total number of performance restricted stock units to be earned is subject to achievement of cumulative performance goals for the two year period ending December 31, 2020.
For the performance restricted stock units granted in 2018, the total number of performance restricted stock units to be earned is subject to achievement of cumulative performance goals for the three year period ending December 31, 2020.
For the 2020 award, fifty percent of the target award was determined based on the Company’s revenue target and fifty percent of the award was determined based on adjusted earnings per share achievements.
The Company’s revenue target was not achieved and fifty percent of the adjusted earnings per share targets were achieved.
For the 2019 award, fifty percent of the target award was determined based on the Company’s revenue compounded annual growth rate achievements and fifty percent of the award was determined based on adjusted earnings per share achievements.
The Company’s revenue compounded annual growth rate target was not achieved and the adjusted earnings per share targets was achieved.
There is a relative total shareholder return modifier that can increase or decrease the payout.
For the 2018 award, twenty five percent of the target award was determined based on the Company’s revenue compounded annual growth rate achievements, twenty five percent of the target award was based on the Company’s relative total shareholder return and fifty percent of the award was determined based on free cash flow achievements.
None of the targets for the 2018 awards were achieved.
The fair value of the target award related to free cash flow was the fair value on the date of the grant, and the fair value of the target awards related to relative shareholder return was based on the Monte Carlo model.
In 2016, the Company implemented the Nielsen Holdings plc 2016 Employee Share Purchase Plan (the ESPP) and 2,000,000 shares were authorized for issuance under the ESPP.
There were 266,984, 201,637 and 174,246 shares issued under the ESPP in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
15.
Income Taxes Nielsen provides for income taxes utilizing the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes.
Under this method, deferred income taxes are recorded to reflect the tax consequences in future years of differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their financial reporting amounts at each balance sheet date, based on enacted tax laws and statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income.
If it is determined that it is more likely than not that future tax benefits associated with a deferred tax asset will not be realized, a valuation allowance is provided.
The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in the tax rates is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations as an adjustment to income tax expense in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company records a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
Such tax positions are, based solely on their technical merits, more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities and reflect the largest amount of benefit, determined on a cumulative probability basis that is more likely than not to be realized upon settlement with the applicable taxing authority with full knowledge of all relevant information.
The Company recognizes interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
On December 22, 2017, the TCJA was signed into law and significantly changed the way the U.S. taxes corporations.
The TCJA reduced the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent and created a territorial-style taxing system.
The TCJA required companies to pay a one-time transition tax on earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries that were previously deferred and also created new taxes on certain types of foreign earnings.
As of December 31, 2017, we made a reasonable estimate of the (a) effects on our existing deferred tax balances, and (b) the one-time transition tax.
Consequently, our fourth quarter of 2017 and full year 2017 results of operations reflected a non-cash provisional net expense of $104 million.
We finalized our accounting for the TCJA in December of 2018 and our results for the fourth quarter of 2018 and full year 2018 results of operations reflect, in accordance with SAB 118, a reduction in tax expense of $252 million as an adjustment to the 2017 provisional expense.
This was primarily comprised of a net tax benefit of $57 million relating to finalizing the calculation of the transition tax (including withholding taxes) together with a net tax benefit of $195 million associated with the re-measurement of our deferred taxes.
The TCJA imposed a U.S. tax on global intangible low taxed income (“GILTI”) that is earned by certain foreign affiliates owned by a U.S. shareholder and was intended to tax earnings of a foreign corporation that are deemed to be in excess of certain threshold return.
As of December 31, 2018, Nielsen made a policy decision and elected to treat taxes on GILTI as a current period expense and have reflected as such in the financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020.
115 As part of an intercompany restructuring during the year ended December 31, 2018, we transferred certain intellectual property assets between wholly-owned legal entities in non-U.S. tax jurisdictions.
As the impact of the transfer was the result of an intra-entity transaction, the resulting gain on the transfer was eliminated for purposes of the consolidated financial statements.
The transferring entity recognized a gain on the transfer of assets that was not subject to income tax in its local jurisdiction.
In accordance with ASU 2016-16, which the Company adopted in the first quarter of 2018, Nielsen recorded an income tax benefit of approximately $193 million Throughout 2019 and 2020, ongoing federal and international audits were effectively settled in certain tax jurisdictions and the impact was recorded accordingly the financial statements.
The components of income/(loss) before income taxes and equity in net income of affiliates, were: Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 UK $ (14 ) $ (30 ) $ 3 Non-UK 88 (633 ) (885 ) Income/(loss) before income taxes and equity in net income/(loss) of affiliates $ 74 $ (663 ) $ (882 ) The above amounts for UK and non-UK activities were determined based on the location of the taxing authorities.
The provision for income taxes attributable to the income/(loss) before income taxes and equity in net income/(loss) of affiliates consisted of: Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 Current: UK $ 1 $ — $ — Non-UK .
135 (265 ) 332 136 (265 ) 332 Deferred: UK 21 1 — Non-UK (90 ) 4 (514 ) (69 ) 5 (514 ) Total $ 67 $ (260 ) $ (182 ) 116 The Company’s provision for income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was different from the amount computed by applying the statutory UK federal income tax rates to the underlying income/(loss) before income taxes and equity in net income/(loss) of affiliates as a result of the following: Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 Income/(loss) before income taxes and equity in net income/(loss) of affiliates $ 74 $ (663 ) $ (882 ) UK statutory tax rate 19.00 % 19.00 % 19.00 % (Benefit)/provision for income taxes at the UK statutory Rate $ 14 $ (126 ) $ (168 ) Impairment of goodwill and long-lived assets — 191 268 Tax impact on distributions from foreign subsidiaries — 4 9 Effect of operations in non-UK jurisdictions 17 32 32 Tax impact of global licensing arrangements (10 ) (16 ) 18 Tax impact of intercompany restructuring — — (142 ) U.S. state and local taxation 2 10 17 Base erosion and other anti-abuse tax (3 ) 35 — Withholding and other taxation 14 29 28 Effect of global financing activities 2 (7 ) (67 ) Changes in estimates for uncertain tax positions and audit settlements (6 ) (442 ) 25 Changes in valuation allowances 28 (40 ) 39 Effect of change in deferred tax rates 5 46 (6 ) Tax impact of post-retirement settlements — 26 — Tax impact of separation transactions 18 — — Research & development credit (7 ) (5) (6 ) Tax impact due to US Tax Reform (1) — — (228 ) Other, net (7 ) 3 (1 ) Total (benefit)/provision for income taxes $ 67 $ (260 ) $ (182 ) Effective tax rate (benefit) and expense 90.5 % (39.2 )% (20.6 )% (1) This includes the impact of BEAT and GILTI for 2018.
117 The components of current and non-current deferred income tax assets/(liabilities) were: (IN MILLIONS) December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 Deferred tax assets (on balance): Net operating loss carryforwards $ 436 $ 484 Capital loss carryforwards 72 50 Interest expense limitation 266 349 Employee benefits 68 59 Tax credit carryforwards 192 186 Share-based payments 10 12 Accrued expenses 39 20 Lease liabilities 122 134 Other assets 48 31 Financial instruments 17 1 1,270 1,326 Valuation allowances (646 ) (636 ) Deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances 624 690 Deferred tax liabilities (on balance): Intangible assets (818 ) (892 ) Fixed asset and computer software depreciation (205 ) (276 ) Lease assets (99 ) (113 ) Unremitted earnings (30 ) (57 ) Unrealized gain on investments (50 ) (49 ) Deferred (revenues)/costs (1 ) (5 ) Deferred compensation (4 ) — Other liabilities (89 ) (74 ) (1,296 ) (1,466 ) Net deferred tax liability $ (672 ) $ (776 ) Realization of deferred tax assets is based, in part, on Nielsen’s judgment and various factors including reversal of deferred tax liabilities, Nielsen’s ability to generate future taxable income in jurisdictions where such assets have arisen and potential tax planning strategies.
Valuation allowances are recorded in order to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized in the future.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019 the Company had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $1,939 million and $2,066 million, respectively, which begin to expire in 2021.
In addition, the Company had tax credit carryforwards of approximately $192 million and $186 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which begin to expire in 2021.
In certain jurisdictions, the Company has operating losses and other tax attributes that, due to the uncertainty of achieving sufficient profits to utilize these operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards, the Company currently believes it is more likely than not that a portion of these losses will not be realized.
Therefore, the Company had a valuation allowance of approximately $647 million and $636 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to net operating loss carryforwards, tax credit carryforwards and deferred tax assets related to other temporary differences.
With respect to the outside basis differences of “domestic” subsidiaries, in each taxing jurisdiction where a tiered ownership structure exists, the Company has confirmed that one or more viable tax planning strategies exists in each separate taxing jurisdiction that it could, and would - if required - employ to eliminate any income tax liability on such outside basis differences.
In addition, resulting from TCJA, the company no longer asserts that all foreign undistributed earnings will be permanently reinvested, but rather the company will, over time, remit up foreign earnings and has provisioned for withholding taxes related to those earnings.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had gross uncertain tax positions of $149 million and $164 million, respectively.
The Company has also accrued interest and penalties associated with these unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $26 million and $25 million, respectively.
Estimated interest and penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes is classified as a component of benefit (provision) for income taxes in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
It is reasonably possible that within the next 12 months certain tax examinations will close, which could result in a change in unrecognized tax benefits, along with related interest and penalties.
Furthermore, the amounts ultimately paid may differ from the amounts accrued.
An estimate of any possible change cannot be made at this time.
118 A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of gross uncertain tax positions is as follows: (IN MILLIONS) December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 December 31, 2018 Balance as of the beginning of period $ 164 $ 572 $ 452 Additions for current year tax positions 1 2 21 Additions for tax positions of prior years — 14 108 Reductions for lapses of statute of limitations (8 ) (424 ) (8 ) Reductions for tax positions of prior years (8 ) — (1 ) Balance as of the end of the period $ 149 $ 164 $ 572 Throughout 2019 and 2020, ongoing federal and international audits were effectively settled in certain tax jurisdictions and the impact was recorded in the financial statements.
If the balance of the Company’s uncertain tax positions is sustained by the taxing authorities in the Company’s favor, the reversal of the entire balance would reduce the Company’s effective tax rate in future periods.
The Company files numerous consolidated and separate income tax returns in the U.S. Federal jurisdiction and in many state and foreign jurisdictions.
With few exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to U.S. Federal income tax examinations for 2015 and prior periods.
In addition, the Company has subsidiaries in various states, provinces and countries that are currently under audit for years ranging from 2007 through 2019.
16.
Investments in Affiliates and Related Party Transactions Related Party Transactions with Affiliates Nielsen had investments in affiliates of $17 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Obligations between Nielsen and its affiliates are regularly settled in cash in the ordinary course of business.
Nielsen had net receivables from its affiliates of approximately $3 million and $2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
17.
Commitments and Contingencies Leases and Other Contractual Arrangements In July 2019, the Company amended its Second Amended and Restated Master Services Agreement (the “MSA”), dated as of October 1, 2017 and effective as of January 1, 2017 (the “Effective Date”), with Tata America International Corporation and Tata Consultancy Services Limited (jointly, “TCS”) by executing Amendment Number One (the “Amendment”) with TCS, dated as of July 1, 2019 and effective as of January 1, 2019 (the “Amendment Effective Date”).
The Amendment reduces the amount of services Nielsen has committed to purchase from TCS from the Amendment Effective Date through the remaining term of the MSA (the “Minimum Commitment”) to $1.413 billion, including a commitment to purchase at least $275 million in services during 2019, at least $250 million in services during 2020, $184.3 million in services per year from 2021 through 2024, and $137.8 million in services in 2025 (in each of the foregoing cases, the “Annual Commitment”).
TCS’s charges under existing and future statements of work (“SOW”) pursuant to the MSA will continue to be credited against the Minimum Commitment and the Annual Commitment and the occurrence of certain events, some of which also provide Nielsen with the right to terminate the Agreement or SOWs, as applicable, will continue to be available to reduce the Minimum and Annual Commitment Amounts as they occur.
The parties also agreed to certain other commercial terms.
However, the other material terms of the MSA as reflected in the MSA and as previously disclosed remain unchanged.
As of December 31, 2020, the remaining TCS commitment was approximately $875 million.
Nielsen has also entered into operating leases and other contractual obligations to secure real estate facilities, agreements to purchase data processing services and leases of computers and other equipment used in the ordinary course of business and various outsourcing contracts.
These agreements are not unilaterally cancelable by Nielsen, are legally enforceable and specify fixed or minimum amounts or quantities of goods or services at fixed or minimum prices.
119 The amounts presented below represent the minimum annual payments under Nielsen’s purchase obligations that have initial or remaining non-cancelable terms in excess of one year.
These purchase obligations include data processing, building maintenance, equipment purchasing, photocopiers, land and mobile telephone service, computer software and hardware maintenance, and outsourcing.
For the Years Ending December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Thereafter Total Operating leases $ 123 $ 105 $ 73 $ 51 $ 33 $ 163 $ 548 Other contractual obligations(a) 447 279 256 186 139 3 1,310 Total $ 570 $ 384 $ 329 $ 237 $ 172 $ 166 $ 1,858 (a) Other contractual obligations represent obligations under agreement, which are not unilaterally cancelable by Nielsen, are legally enforceable and specify fixed or minimum amounts or quantities of goods or services at fixed or minimum prices.
Nielsen generally requires purchase orders for vendor and third party spending.
The amounts presented above represent the minimum future annual services covered by purchase obligations including data processing, cloud services, building maintenance, equipment purchasing, photocopiers, land and mobile telephone service, computer software and hardware maintenance, and outsourcing.
Nielsen’s remaining commitments as of December 31, 2020, under the outsourced services agreement with TCS have been included above based on the Annual Commitment minimum required payments.
Total expenses incurred under operating leases were $126 million, $123 million and $96 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Nielsen recognized rental income received under subleases of $2 million, $3 million and $6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, Nielsen had aggregate future proceeds to be received under sub-lease guarantees of $4 million.
Nielsen also has minimum commitments under non-cancelable finance leases.
See Note 5 “Leases” for more information on finance leases.
Guarantees and Other Contingent Commitments At December 31, 2020, Nielsen was committed under the following significant guarantee arrangements: Sub-lease guarantees Nielsen provides sub-lease guarantees in accordance with certain agreements pursuant to which Nielsen guarantees all rental payments upon default of rental payment by the sub-lessee.
To date, the Company has not been required to perform under such arrangements, does not anticipate making any significant payments related to such guarantees and, accordingly, no amounts have been recorded.
Letters of credit Letters of credit issued and outstanding amount to $18 million and $17 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Legal Proceedings and Contingencies In August 2018, a putative shareholder class action lawsuit was filed in the Southern District of New York, naming as defendants Nielsen, former Chief Executive Officer Dwight Mitchell Barns, and former Chief Financial Officer Jamere Jackson.
Another lawsuit, which alleged similar facts but also named other Nielsen officers, was filed in the Northern District of Illinois in September 2018 and transferred to the Southern District of New York in December 2018.
The actions were consolidated on April 22, 2019, and the Public Employees’ Retirement System of Mississippi was appointed lead plaintiff for the putative class.
The operative complaint was filed on September 27, 2019, and asserts violations of certain provisions of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, based on allegedly false and materially misleading statements relating to the outlook of Nielsen’s Buy (now “Connect”) segment, Nielsen’s preparedness for changes in global data privacy laws and Nielsen’s reliance on third-party data.
Nielsen moved to dismiss the operative complaint on November 26, 2019.
On January 4, 2021, certain of the allegations against Nielsen and its officers were dismissed, while others were sustained.
Discovery is in its early stages and is ongoing.
In addition, in January 2019, a shareholder derivative lawsuit was filed in New York Supreme Court against a number of Nielsen’s current and former officers and directors.
The derivative lawsuit alleges that the named officers and directors breached their fiduciary duties to the Company in connection with factual assertions substantially similar to those in the putative class action complaint.
The derivative lawsuit further alleges that certain officers and directors engaged in trading Nielsen stock based on material, nonpublic information.
By agreement dated June 26, 2019, the derivative lawsuit was stayed pending resolution of Nielsen’s motion to dismiss the aforementioned securities litigation.
Nielsen anticipates an amended complaint will be filed in the coming months.
Nielsen intends to defend these lawsuits 120 vigorously.
Based on currently available information, Nielsen believes that the Company has meritorious defenses to these actions and that their resolution is not likely to have a material adverse effect on Nielsen’s business, financial position, or results of operations.
As previously disclosed in the Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 1, 2021, five lawsuits were filed relating to the Connect Transaction in federal and state courts, including one purported class action lawsuit, by purported Nielsen shareholders against Nielsen and the members of our Board of Directors (collectively, the “Actions”).
The Actions generally alleged that the proxy statement filed by Nielsen in connection with the Transaction misrepresented and/or omitted certain purportedly material information and asserted violations of Sections 14(a) and 20(a) of the Exchange Act and the rules promulgated thereunder or negligent and fraudulent misrepresentation and concealment in violation of New York common law and breach of duty of disclosure under the laws of England and Wales.
The alleged material misstatements and omissions related to, among other topics, certain forecasted financial information for the Global Connect business prepared by Nielsen’s management, the opinion of J.P. Morgan Securities LLC (“J.P.
Morgan”), Nielsen’s financial advisor, in connection with the Connect Transaction, the interests of Nielsen’s directors and officers in the Transaction and certain background events that occurred in connection with the Connect Transaction.
The plaintiffs in each of the Actions sought, among other things, an injunction against the consummation of the Transaction or, in the alternative, rescission damages, as well as an award of costs and expenses (including attorneys’ and experts’ fees and expenses).
On February 1, 2021, Nielsen filed a Current Report on Form 8-K with the SEC voluntarily making supplemental disclosures related to the Connect Transaction.
In light of the supplemental disclosures, the plaintiffs in the Actions agreed to dismiss their claims with prejudice as to the named plaintiffs only and without prejudice to all other members of the putative class.
As of February 25, 2021, the four Actions filed in federal court have been voluntarily dismissed and the parties in the state court action have filed a stipulation and proposed order of voluntary discontinuance with the court.
Nielsen is subject to litigation and other claims in the ordinary course of business, some of which include claims for substantial sums.
Accruals have been recorded when the outcome is probable and can be reasonably estimated.
While the ultimate results of claims and litigation cannot be determined, the Company does expect that the ultimate disposition of these matters will not have a material adverse effect on its operations or financial condition.
However, depending on the amount and the timing, an unfavorable resolution of some or all of these matters could materially affect the Company’s future results of operations or cash flows in a particular period.
18.
Segments The Company aligns its operating segments in order to conform to management’s internal reporting structure, which is reflective of service offerings by industry.
Operating segments are aggregated into two reporting segments: Nielsen Global Connect (“Connect”), consisting principally of market research information and analytical services; and Nielsen Global Media (“Media”), consisting principally of television, radio, online and mobile audience and advertising measurement and corresponding analytics.
Corporate consists principally of unallocated items such as certain facilities and infrastructure costs as well as intersegment eliminations.
Certain corporate costs, other than those described above, including those related to selling, finance, legal, human resources, and information technology systems, are considered operating costs and are allocated to the Company’s segments based on either the actual amount of costs incurred or on a basis consistent with the operations of the underlying segment.
Information with respect to the operations of each of Nielsen’s business segments is set forth below based on the nature of the services offered and geographic areas of operations.
121 Business Segment Information (IN MILLIONS) Connect Media Corporate Total Year Ended December 31, 2020 Revenues $ 2,929 $ 3,361 $ — $ 6,290 Operating income/(loss) (64 ) 782 (252 ) 466 Depreciation and amortization 267 590 7 864 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets 126 58 — 184 Restructuring charges 107 26 11 144 Share-based compensation expense 15 15 23 53 Separation-related costs(1) 2 3 118 123 Other items(2) 1 1 46 48 Business segment income/(loss)(3) $ 454 $ 1,474 $ (46 ) $ 1,882 Total assets $ 4,234 $ 9,129 $ 772 $ 14,135 (IN MILLIONS) Connect Media Corporate Total Year Ended December 31, 2019 Revenues $ 3,057 $ 3,441 $ — $ 6,498 Operating income/(loss) (877 ) 930 (146 ) (93 ) Depreciation and amortization 231 518 7 756 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets 1,004 — — 1,004 Restructuring charges 49 15 16 80 Share-based compensation expense 15 13 32 50 Other items(2) — — 56 56 Business segment income/(loss)(3) $ 422 $ 1,476 $ (45 ) $ 1,853 Total assets $ 4,376 $ 9,675 $ 268 $ 14,319 (IN MILLIONS) Connect Media Corporate Total Year Ended December 31, 2018 Revenues $ 3,138 $ 3,377 $ — $ 6,515 Operating income/(loss) (1,329 ) 998 (144 ) (475 ) Depreciation and amortization 223 444 8 675 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets 1,411 — 2 1,413 Restructuring charges 101 23 15 139 Share-based compensation expense 14 11 10 35 Other items(2) — — 63 63 Business segment income/(loss)(3) $ 420 $ 1,476 $ (46 ) $ 1,850 (1) Separation-related costs consists of costs that would not have been incurred if Nielsen was not undertaking the separation of the Nielsen Global Connect business from the Nielsen Global Media business and positioning Global Connect and Global Media to operate as two independent companies.
(2)
 Other items primarily consist of business optimization costs and transaction related costs for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other items primarily consist of business optimization costs, including strategic review costs, and transaction related costs for the year ended December 31, 2019.
(3) The Company’s chief operating decision-maker uses business segment income/(loss) to measure performance from period to period both at the consolidated level as well as within its operating segments.
122 Year ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 Capital expenditures Connect $ 213 $ 195 $ 219 Media 279 308 278 Corporate and eliminations 27 16 23 Total $ 519 $ 519 $ 520 Geographic Segment Information Operating Long- Income/ Lived (IN MILLIONS) Revenues(1) (Loss) Assets(2) 2020 U.S. $ 3,678 $ 191 $ 9,720 North and South America, excluding the U.S. 505 100 295 United Kingdom 209 (36 ) 131 Other Europe, Middle East & Africa 1,169 77 635 Asia Pacific 729 134 176 Total $ 6,290 $ 466 $ 10,957 Operating Long- Income/ Lived (IN MILLIONS) Revenues(1) (Loss) Assets(2) 2019 U.S. $ 3,724 $ 85 $ 10,176 North and South America, excluding the U.S. 551 (104 ) 297 United Kingdom 208 (110 ) 120 Other Europe, Middle East & Africa 1,179 (26 ) 578 Asia Pacific 836 62 169 Total $ 6,498 $ (93 ) $ 11,340 Operating Income/ (IN MILLIONS) Revenues(1) (Loss) 2018 U.S. $ 3,697 $ 31 North and South America, excluding the U.S. 569 (226 ) United Kingdom 192 (130) Other Europe, Middle East & Africa 1,217 (157 ) Asia Pacific 840 7 Total $ 6,515 $ (475 ) (1) Revenues are attributed to geographic areas based on the location of customers.
(2) Long-lived assets include property, plant and equipment, goodwill and other intangible assets.
123 19.
Additional Financial Information Accounts payable and other current liabilities December 31, December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 Trade payables $ 232 $ 230 Personnel costs 234 301 Current portion of restructuring liabilities 58 30 Data and professional services 225 202 Interest payable 58 61 Other current liabilities(1) 402 358 Total accounts payable and other current liabilities $ 1,209 $ 1,182 (1) Other includes multiple items, none of which is individually significant.
20.
Guarantor Financial Information The following supplemental financial information is being provided for purposes of compliance with reporting covenants contained in certain debt obligations of Nielsen and its subsidiaries.
The financial information sets forth for Nielsen, its subsidiaries that have issued certain debt securities (the “Issuers”) and its guarantor and non-guarantor subsidiaries, the consolidating balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and consolidating statements of operations and cash flows for the periods ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company re-designated certain subsidiaries between guarantor and non-guarantor.
As a result, the Company adjusted the prior period condensed consolidated statement of comprehensive income and the condensed consolidated balance sheet to reflect the current year structure.
The issued debt securities are jointly and severally guaranteed on a full and unconditional basis by Nielsen and subject to certain exceptions, each of the direct and indirect 100% owned subsidiaries of Nielsen, in each case to the extent that such entities provide a guarantee under the senior secured credit facilities.
The issuers are also 100% owned indirect subsidiaries of Nielsen: Nielsen Finance LLC and Nielsen Finance Co. for certain series of debt obligations, and The Nielsen Company (Luxembourg) S.ar.l., for the other series of debt obligations.
Each issuer is a guarantor of the debt obligations not issued by it.
Nielsen is a holding company and does not have any material assets or operations other than ownership of the capital stock of its direct and indirect subsidiaries.
All of Nielsen’s operations are conducted through its subsidiaries, and, therefore, Nielsen is expected to continue to be dependent upon the cash flows of its subsidiaries to meet its obligations.
The senior secured credit facilities contain certain limitations on the ability of Nielsen to receive the cash flows of its subsidiaries.
While all subsidiary guarantees of the issued debt securities are full and unconditional, these guarantees contain customary release provisions including when (i) the subsidiary is sold or sells all of its assets, (ii) the subsidiary is declared “unrestricted” for covenant purposes, (iii) the subsidiary’s guarantee under the senior secured credit facilities is released and (iv) the requirements for discharge of the indenture have been satisfied.
124 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income For the year ended December 31, 2020 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Elimination Consolidated Revenues $ — $ — $ 4,184 $ 2,106 $ — $ 6,290 Cost of revenues, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below — — 1,615 1,145 — 2,760 Selling, general and administrative expenses, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 13 — 998 861 — 1,872 Depreciation and amortization — — 722 142 — 864 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets — — 171 13 — 184 Restructuring charges — — 44 100 — 144 Operating income/(loss) (13 ) — 634 (155 ) — 466 Interest income 1 682 20 13 (714 ) 2 Interest expense — (340 ) (724 ) (21 ) 714 (371 ) Foreign currency exchange transaction gains/(losses), net — — 17 (26 ) — (9 ) Other income/(expense), net — (6 ) (294 ) 286 — (14 ) Income/(loss) before income taxes and equity in net income/(loss) of subsidiaries (12 ) 336 (347 ) 97 — 74 Benefit/(provision) for income taxes — (104 ) 85 (48 ) — (67 ) Equity in net income/(loss) of subsidiaries 6 181 269 — (456 ) — Equity in net income/(loss) of affiliates — — (1 ) 1 — — Net income/(loss) (6 ) 413 6 50 (456 ) 7 Less net income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — 13 — 13 Net income/(loss) attributable to controlling interest (6 ) 413 6 37 (456 ) (6 ) Total other comprehensive income/(loss) (100 ) (44 ) (100 ) (109 ) 253 (100 ) Total other comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — — — — Total other comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to controlling interests (100 ) (44 ) (100 ) (109 ) 253 (100 ) Total comprehensive income/(loss) (106 ) 369 (94 ) (59 ) (203 ) (93 ) Comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — 13 — 13 Total comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to controlling interest $ (106 ) $ 369 $ (94 ) $ (72 ) $ (203 ) $ (106 ) 125 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income For the year ended December 31, 2019 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Elimination Consolidated Revenues $ — $ — $ 4,233 $ 2,265 $ — $ 6,498 Cost of revenues, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below — — 1,599 1,223 — 2,822 Selling, general and administrative expenses, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 14 — 983 932 — 1,929 Depreciation and amortization — — 631 125 — 756 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets — — 419 585 — 1,004 Restructuring charges — — 37 43 — 80 Operating income/(loss) (14 ) — 564 (643 ) — (93 ) Interest income 1 726 69 10 (800 ) 6 Interest expense — (371 ) (756 ) (70 ) 800 (397 ) Foreign currency exchange transaction gains/(losses), net — — 19 (29 ) — (10 ) Other income/(expense), net — — (269 ) 100 — (169 ) Income/(loss) before income taxes and equity in net income/(loss) of subsidiaries (13 ) 355 (373 ) (632 ) — (663 ) Benefit/(provision) for income taxes — (112 ) 270 102 — 260 Equity in net income/(loss) of subsidiaries (402 ) 176 (298 ) — 524 — Equity in net income/(loss) of affiliates — — (1 ) 1 — — Net income/(loss) (415 ) 419 (402 ) (529 ) 524 (403 ) Less net income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — 12 — 12 Net income/(loss) attributable to controlling interest (415 ) 419 (402 ) (541 ) 524 (415 ) Total other comprehensive income/(loss) 105 (20 ) 105 195 (278 ) 107 Total other comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — 2 — 2 Total other comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to controlling interests 105 (20 ) 105 193 (278 ) 105 Total comprehensive income/(loss) (310 ) 399 (297 ) (334 ) 246 (296 ) Comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — 14 — 14 Total comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to controlling interest $ (310 ) $ 399 $ (297 ) $ (348 ) $ 246 $ (310 ) 126 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income For the year ended December 31, 2018 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Elimination Consolidated Revenues $ — $ — $ 4,217 $ 2,298 $ — $ 6,515 Cost of revenues, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below — — 1,526 1,279 — 2,805 Selling, general and administrative expenses, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 4 — 990 964 — 1,958 Depreciation and amortization — — 548 127 — 675 Impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets — — 579 834 — 1,413 Restructuring charges — — 55 84 — 139 Operating income/(loss) (4 ) — 519 (990 ) — (475 ) Interest income 1 681 39 5 (718 ) 8 Interest expense — (369 ) (705 ) (38 ) 718 (394 ) Foreign currency exchange transaction gains/(losses), net — — (1 ) (15 ) — (16 ) Other income/(expense), net — (6 ) 354 (353 ) — (5 ) Income/(loss) before income taxes and equity in net income/(loss) of subsidiaries (3 ) 306 206 (1,391 ) — (882 ) Benefit/(provision) for income taxes — (99 ) 329 (48 ) — 182 Equity in net income/(loss) of subsidiaries (709 ) 167 (1,244 ) — 1,786 — Net income/(loss) (712 ) 374 (709 ) (1,439 ) 1,786 (700 ) Less net income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — 12 — 12 Net income/(loss) attributable to controlling interest (712 ) 374 (709 ) (1,451 ) 1,786 (712 ) Total other comprehensive income/(loss) (170 ) 17 (170 ) (166 ) 318 (171 ) Total other comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — (1 ) — (1 ) Total other comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to controlling interests (170 ) 17 (170 ) (165 ) 318 (170 ) Total comprehensive income/(loss) (882 ) 391 (879 ) (1,605 ) 2,104 (871 ) Comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — 11 — 11 Total comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to controlling interest $ (882 ) $ 391 $ (879 ) $ (1,616 ) $ 2,104 $ (882 ) 127 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Balance Sheet December 31, 2020 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Elimination Consolidated Assets: Current assets Cash and cash equivalents $ 3 $ - $ 157 $ 450 $ - $ 610 Trade and other receivables, net - - 629 525 - 1,154 Prepaid expenses and other current assets - - 324 136 - 460 Intercompany receivables 1 1,897 137 225 (2,260 ) - Total current assets 4 1,897 1,247 1,336 (2,260 ) 2,224 Non-current assets - Property, plant and equipment, net - - 279 168 - 447 Operating lease right-of-use asset - - 175 203 - 378 Goodwill - - 5,146 894 - 6,040 Other intangible assets, net - - 4,046 424 - 4,470 Deferred tax assets - - 125 156 - 281 Other non-current assets - - 220 75 - 295 Equity investment in subsidiaries 2,023 1,312 4,507 - (7,842 ) - Intercompany loans 25 8,646 212 1 (8,884 ) - Total assets $ 2,052 $ 11,855 $ 15,957 $ 3,257 $ (18,986 ) $ 14,135 Liabilities and equity: Current liabilities Accounts payable and other current liabilities $ - $ 61 $ 577 $ 571 $ - $ 1,209 Deferred revenues - - 273 97 - 370 Income tax liabilities - - 3 39 - 42 Current portion of long-term debt, finance lease obligations and short-term borrowings - 229 57 7 - 293 Intercompany payables 1 1 2,123 135 (2,260 ) - Total current liabilities 1 291 3,033 849 (2,260 ) 1,914 Non-current liabilities - Long-term debt and finance lease obligations - 7,148 850 16 - 8,014 Operating lease liabilities - - 196 162 - 358 Deferred tax liabilities - 71 816 66 - 953 Intercompany loans - - 8,673 211 (8,884 ) - Other non-current liabilities - 48 366 239 - 653 Total liabilities 1 7,558 13,934 1,543 (11,144 ) 11,892 Total shareholders’ equity 2,051 4,297 2,023 1,522 (7,842 ) 2,051 Noncontrolling interests - - - 192 - 192 Total equity 2,051 4,297 2,023 1,714 (7,842 ) 2,243 Total liabilities and equity $ 2,052 $ 11,855 $ 15,957 $ 3,257 $ (18,986 ) $ 14,135 128 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Balance Sheet December 31, 2019 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Elimination Consolidated Assets: Current assets Cash and cash equivalents $ 2 $ - $ 78 $ 374 $ - $ 454 Trade and other receivables, net - - 540 563 - 1,103 Prepaid expenses and other current assets - - 295 125 - 420 Intercompany receivables 7 1,615 309 328 (2,259 ) - Total current assets 9 1,615 1,222 1,390 (2,259 ) 1,977 Non-current assets - Property, plant and equipment, net - - 303 163 - 466 Operating lease right-of-use asset - - 194 199 - 393 Goodwill - - 5,131 862 - 5,993 Other intangible assets, net - - 4,332 549 - 4,881 Deferred tax assets 1 - - 275 - 276 Other non-current assets - - 260 73 - 333 Equity investment in subsidiaries 2,170 1,298 5,399 - (8,867 ) - Intercompany loans 25 8,887 223 1,605 (10,740 ) - Total assets $ 2,205 $ 11,800 $ 17,064 $ 5,116 $ (21,866 ) $ 14,319 Liabilities and equity: Current liabilities Accounts payable and other current liabilities $ 10 $ 62 $ 565 $ 545 $ - $ 1,182 Deferred revenues - - 257 88 - 345 Income tax liabilities - - 4 56 - 60 Current portion of long-term debt, finance lease obligations and short-term borrowings - 861 46 7 - 914 Intercompany payables - 3 1,948 308 (2,259 ) - Total current liabilities 10 926 2,820 1,004 (2,259 ) 2,501 Non-current liabilities - Long-term debt and finance lease obligations - 7,302 80 13 - 7,395 Operating lease liabilities - - 217 153 - 370 Deferred tax liabilities - 71 887 94 - 1,052 Intercompany loans - - 10,516 224 (10,740 ) - Other non-current liabilities - 22 374 217 - 613 Total liabilities 10 8,321 14,894 1,705 (12,999 ) 11,931 Total shareholders’ equity 2,195 3,479 2,170 3,218 (8,867 ) 2,195 Noncontrolling interests - - - 193 - 193 Total equity 2,195 3,479 2,170 3,411 (8,867 ) 2,388 Total liabilities and equity $ 2,205 $ 11,800 $ 17,064 $ 5,116 $ (21,866 ) $ 14,319 129 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows For the year ended December 31, 2020 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Consolidated Net cash provided by/(used in) operating activities $ (14 ) $ 85 $ 1,051 $ (123 ) $ 999 Investing activities: — Acquisition of subsidiaries and affiliates, net of cash acquired — — (15 ) (15 ) (30 ) Proceeds from the sale of subsidiaries and affiliates — — 4 9 13 Additions to property, plant and equipment and other assets — — (42 ) (44 ) (86 ) Additions to intangible assets — — (347 ) (86 ) (433 ) Other investing activities 1 — 1 (3 ) (1 ) Net cash provided by/(used in) investing activities 1 — (399 ) (139 ) (537 ) Financing activities: Proceeds from debt, net of issuance costs — 2,258 713 — 2,971 Repayments of debt — (3,089 ) (3 ) — (3,092 ) Cash dividends paid to shareholders (86 ) — — — (86 ) Activity under stock plans (2 ) — (10 ) — (12 ) Proceeds from employee stock purchase plan 4 — (1 ) — 3 Finance leases — — (52 ) (8 ) (60 ) Settlement of intercompany and other financing activities 98 746 (1,217 ) 342 (31 ) Net cash provided by/(used in) financing activities 14 (85 ) (570 ) 334 (307 ) Effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents — — (3 ) 4 1 Net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 1 — 79 76 156 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 2 — 78 374 454 Cash and cash equivalents at end of period $ 3 $ — $ 157 $ 450 $ 610 130 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows For the year ended December 31, 2019 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Consolidated Net cash provided by/(used in) operating activities $ (8 ) $ 90 $ 1,045 $ (61 ) $ 1,066 Investing activities: — Acquisition of subsidiaries and affiliates, net of cash acquired — — (11 ) (50 ) (61 ) Proceeds from the sale of subsidiaries and affiliates 17 — 17 Additions to property, plant and equipment and other assets — — (59 ) (57 ) (116 ) Additions to intangible assets — — (340 ) (63 ) (403 ) Other investing activities — — (16 ) (3 ) (19 ) Net cash provided by/(used in) investing activities — — (409 ) (173 ) (582 ) Financing activities: Repayments of debt — (57 ) — — (57 ) Increase/(decrease) in short term borrowings — — — (1 ) (1 ) Cash dividends paid to shareholders (395 ) — — — (395 ) Activity under stock plans — — (8 ) — (8 ) Proceeds from employee stock purchase plan 4 — — — 4 Finance leases — — (54 ) (6 ) (60 ) Settlement of intercompany and other financing activities 398 (33 ) (570 ) 178 (27 ) Net cash provided by/(used in) financing activities 7 (90 ) (632 ) 171 (544 ) Effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents — — (5 ) (5 ) (10 ) Net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents (1 ) — (1 ) (68 ) (70 ) Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 3 — 79 442 524 Cash and cash equivalents at end of period $ 2 $ — $ 78 $ 374 $ 454 131 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows For the year ended December 31, 2018 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Consolidated Net cash provided by/(used in) operating activities $ (2 ) $ 240 $ 960 $ (140 ) $ 1,058 Investing activities: — Acquisition of subsidiaries and affiliates, net of cash acquired — — (15 ) (28 ) (43 ) Proceeds from the sale of subsidiaries and affiliates 51 — 51 Additions to property, plant and equipment and other assets — — (54 ) (52 ) (106 ) Additions to intangible assets — — (366 ) (48 ) (414 ) Proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment and other assets — — — 4 4 Other investing activities — — 9 (7 ) 2 Net cash provided by/(used in) investing activities — — (375 ) (131 ) (506 ) Financing activities: Repayments of debt — (818 ) — (1 ) (819 ) Proceeds from the issuance of debt, net of issuance costs — 781 — — 781 Increase/(decrease) in short term borrowings — — — 1 1 Cash dividends paid to shareholders (494 ) — — — (494 ) Repurchase of common stock (70 ) — — — (70 ) Activity under stock plans 23 — (8 ) — 15 Proceeds from employee stock purchase plan 5 — — — 5 Finance leases — — (73 ) (3 ) (76 ) Settlement of intercompany and other financing activities 539 (204 ) (491 ) 137 (19 ) Net cash provided by/(used in) financing activities 3 (241 ) (572 ) 134 (676 ) Effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents — — (3 ) (5 ) (8 ) Net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 1 (1 ) 10 (142 ) (132 ) Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 2 1 69 584 656 Cash and cash equivalents at end of period $ 3 $ — $ 79 $ 442 $ 524 2 132 21.
Quarterly Financial Data (unaudited) First Second Third Fourth (IN MILLIONS, EXCEPT PER SHARE DATA) Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter 2020 Revenues $ 1,559 $ 1,496 $ 1,563 $ 1,672 Operating income/(loss) $ 98 $ 28 $ 174 $ 166 Income(loss) before income taxes and equity in net income(loss) of affiliates $ (2 ) $ (64 ) $ 79 $ 61 Net income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders $ (18 ) $ (30 ) $ 7 $ 35 Net income/(loss) per share of common stock, basic Net income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders $ (0.05 ) $ (0.08 ) $ 0.02 $ 0.10 Net income/(loss) per share of common stock, diluted 
Net income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders $ (0.05 ) $ (0.08 ) $ 0.02 $ 0.10 First Second Third Fourth (IN MILLIONS, EXCEPT PER SHARE DATA) Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter 2019 Revenues $ 1,563 $ 1,628 $ 1,616 $ 1,691 Operating income/(loss) $ 174 $ 249 $ (740 ) $ 224 Income(loss) before income taxes and equity in net income(loss) of affiliates $ 79 $ 149 $ (848 ) $ (43 ) Net income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders $ 43 $ 123 $ (472 ) $ (109 ) Net income/(loss) per share of common stock, basic Net income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders $ 0.12 $ 0.35 $ (1.33 ) $ (0.31 ) Net income/(loss) per share of common stock, diluted 
Net income/(loss) attributable to Nielsen shareholders $ 0.12 $ 0.34 $ (1.33 ) $ (0.31 ) 22.
Subsequent Events A virtual special meeting of Nielsen’s shareholders was held on February 11, 2021.
At the special meeting, the Proposed Connect Transaction was submitted to a vote of the shareholders through the solicitation of proxies.
Approval of the Proposed Connect Transaction required the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of ordinary shares present (online or by proxy) at the special meeting.
The Proposed Connect Transaction was approved by the requisite vote of Nielsen’s shareholders.
133 Schedule I—Condensed Financial Information of Registrant Nielsen Holdings plc Parent Company Only Statements of Operations Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 Selling, general and administrative expenses $ 13 $ 14 $ 4 Operating loss (13 ) (14 ) (4 ) Interest income/(loss) 1 1 1 Interest expense — — — Other income/(expense), net — — — Income/(loss) before income taxes and equity in net income/(loss) of subsidiaries (12 ) (13 ) (3 ) Benefit/(provision) for income taxes — — — Equity in net income/(loss) of subsidiaries 6 (402 ) (709 ) Net income/(loss) $ (6 ) $ (415 ) $ (712 ) Nielsen Holdings plc Parent Company Only Balance Sheets December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 Assets: Current assets Cash and cash equivalents $ 3 $ 2 Amounts receivable from subsidiary 1 7 Total current assets 4 9 Investment in subsidiaries 2,023 2,170 Loans outstanding from subsidiary 25 25 Other non-current assets — 1 Total assets $ 2,052 $ 2,205 Liabilities and equity: Current liabilities Accounts payable and other current liabilities — 10 Intercompany payables 1 — Total current liabilities 1 10 Loans outstanding from subsidiary — — Other non-current liabilities — — Total liabilities 1 10 Total equity 2,051 2,195 Total liabilities and equity $ 2,052 $ 2,205 134 Nielsen Holdings plc Parent Company Only Statements of Cash Flows Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2020 2019 2018 Net cash provided by/(used in) operating activities $ (14 ) $ (8 ) $ (2 ) Investing Activities: 

Other investing activities 1 — — Net cash provided by/(used in) investment activities 1 — — Financing Activities: Cash dividends paid to shareholders (86 ) (395 ) (494 ) Repurchase of common stock — — (70 ) Activity under stock plans (2 ) — 23 Proceeds from employee stock purchase plan 4 4 5 Other financing activities 98 398 539 Net cash provided by/(used in) financing activities 14 7 3 Net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 1 (1 ) 1 Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period 2 3 2 Cash and cash equivalents, end of period $ 3 $ 2 $ 3 The notes to the consolidated financial statements of Nielsen Holdings plc (the “Company”) are an integral part of these nonconsolidated financial statements.
Notes to Schedule I 1.
Basis of Presentation The Company has accounted for the earnings of its subsidiaries under the equity method in these financial statements.
2.
Commitments and Contingencies The debenture loans are jointly and severally guaranteed on an unconditional basis by the Company and subject to certain exceptions, each of the direct and indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries of the Company, including VNU Intermediate Holding B.V., Nielsen Holding and Finance B.V., VNU International B.V., TNC (US) Holdings, Inc., VNU Marketing Information, Inc. and ACN Holdings, Inc., and the wholly-owned subsidiaries thereof, including the wholly-owned U.S. subsidiaries of ACN Holdings, Inc., in each case to the extent that such entities provide a guarantee under the senior secured credit facilities.
The issuers are Nielsen Finance LLC and Nielsen Finance Co., both wholly-owned subsidiaries of ACN Holdings, Inc. and subsidiary guarantors and The Nielsen Company (Luxembourg) S ar l., a wholly owned subsidiary of Nielsen Holding and Finance B.V.
The historical financial information has been updated to reflect The Nielsen Company (Luxembourg) S.ar.l.
as an issuer.
The Company had no material commitments or contingencies during the reported periods.
3.
Related Party Transactions The Company enters into certain transactions with its subsidiaries through the normal course of operations and periodically settles these transactions in cash.
The Company had a $25 million loan receivable from subsidiaries associated with financing transactions for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
135 4.
Common Stock and Related Transactions On January 31, 2013, the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board”) adopted a cash dividend policy to pay quarterly cash dividends on its outstanding common stock.
The following table represents the cash dividends declared by the Board and paid to shareholders for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively.
Declaration Date Record Date Payment Date Dividend Per Share February 21, 2019 March 7, 2019 March 21, 2019 $ 0.35 April 18, 2019 June 5, 2019 June 19, 2019 $ 0.35 July 18, 2019 August 22, 2019 September 5, 2019 $ 0.35 November 3, 2019 November 21, 2019 December 5, 2019 $ 0.06 February 20, 2020 March 5, 2020 March 19, 2020 $ 0.06 April 16, 2020 June 4, 2020 June 18, 2020 $ 0.06 July 16, 2020 August 20, 2020 September 3, 2020 $ 0.06 October 27, 2020 November 19, 2020 December 3, 2020 $ 0.06 On February 4, 2021, the Board declared a cash dividend of $0.06 per share on Nielsen’s common stock.
The dividend is payable on March 18, 2021 to shareholders of record at the close of business on March 4, 2021.
The dividend policy and payment of future cash dividends are subject to the discretion of the Board.
Nielsen’s Board approved a share repurchase program, as included in the below table, for up to $2 billion of the Company’s outstanding common stock.
The primary purpose of the program is to return value to shareholders and to mitigate dilution associated with Nielsen’s equity compensation plans.
Board Approval Share Repurchase Authorization ($ in millions) July 25, 2013 $ 500 October 23, 2014 $ 1,000 December 11, 2015 $ 500 Total Share Repurchase Authorization $ 2,000 Repurchases under this program will be made in accordance with applicable securities laws from time to time and depending on Nielsen’s evaluation of market conditions and other factors.
This program has been executed within the limitations of the authority granted Nielsen on August 6, 2015 and which has been extended by the authority approved by Nielsen's shareholders at its annual general meeting of shareholders held on May 12, 2020, which authority will expire on May 12, 2025.
As of December 31, 2020, there have been 39,426,521 shares of the Company’s common stock purchased at an average price of $44.95 per share (total consideration of approximately $1,772 million) under this program.
There were no share repurchases for the year ended December 31, 2020 136 Schedule II—Valuation and Qualifying Accounts For the Years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (IN MILLIONS) BalanceBeginning ofPeriod Charges toEarnings Deductions Effect ofForeignCurrencyTranslation Balance atEnd ofPeriod Allowance for doubtful accounts and sales returns For the year ended December 31, 2018 $ 29 $ 5 $ (2 ) $ (1 ) $ 31 For the year ended December 31, 2019 $ 31 $ 2 $ (5 ) $ - $ 28 For the year ended December 31, 2020 $ 28 $ 17 $ (5 ) $ 1 $ 41 (IN MILLIONS) BalanceBeginning ofPeriod Charges/(Credits) toExpense ChargedtoOtherAccounts Effect ofForeignCurrencyTranslation Balance atEnd ofPeriod Valuation allowance for deferred taxes For the year ended December 31, 2018 $ 466 $ 193 $ 3 $ (11 ) $ 651 For the year ended December 31, 2019 $ 651 $ (4 ) $ 1 $ (12 ) $ 636 For the year ended December 31, 2020 $ 636 $ 11 $ 2 $ (3 ) $ 646 137 Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure None.
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures (a) Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures The Company maintains disclosure controls and procedures that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in the reports that the Company files or submits to the SEC under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to the Company’s management, including its principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
In designing and evaluating the disclosure controls and procedures, management recognized that any controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives, as the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures are designed to do.
The Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have evaluated the effectiveness of the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures (as such term is defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act) as of December 31, 2020 (the “Evaluation Date”).
Based on such evaluation and subject to the foregoing, such officers have concluded that, as of the Evaluation Date, the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures are effective at the reasonable assurance level to ensure that information required to be disclosed by the Company in the reports that the Company files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms and to ensure that information required to be disclosed by the Company in the reports that the Company files or submits under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to the Company’s management, including its principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
(b) Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting appears in Part II, Item 8.
“Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this annual report on Form 10-K. (c) Attestation Report of the Registered Public Accounting Firm The Company’s financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K have been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, independent registered public accounting firm.
Ernst & Young LLP has also provided an attestation report on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Their reports appear in Part II,
