Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Introduction The following discussion and analysis should be read together with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto.
Further, this report may contain material that includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 that reflect, when made, Nielsen’s current views with respect to current events and financial performance.
These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in “Item 1A.
Risk Factors.” Statements, other than those based on historical facts, which address activities, events or developments that we expect or anticipate may occur in the future are forward-looking statements.
Such forward-looking statements are and will be, as the case may be, subject to many risks, uncertainties and factors relating to Nielsen’s operations and business environment that may cause actual results to be materially different from any future results, express or implied, by such forward-looking statements.
See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The terms “Company,” “Nielsen,” “we,” “our” or “us,” as used herein, refer to Nielsen Holdings plc and its consolidated subsidiaries unless otherwise stated or indicated by context.
Background and Executive Summary We are a leading global performance management company that provides clients with a comprehensive understanding of consumers and consumer behavior.
We deliver critical media and marketing information, analytics and industry expertise about what consumers buy (referred to herein as “Buy”) and what consumers read, watch and listen to (consumer interaction across the television, radio, digital and mobile viewing and listening platforms referred to herein as “Watch”) on a global and local basis.
Our measurement and analytical services help our clients maintain and strengthen their market positions and identify opportunities for profitable growth.
We have a presence in more than 100 countries, including many emerging markets, and hold leading market positions in many of our services and geographies.
We believe that important measures of our results of operations include revenue, operating income and Adjusted EBITDA (defined below).
Our long-term financial objectives include consistent revenue growth and expanding operating margins.
Accordingly, we are focused on geographic market and service offering expansion to drive revenue growth and improve operating efficiencies, including effective resource utilization, information technology leverage and overhead cost management.
Our business strategy is built upon a model that has traditionally yielded consistent revenue performance.
Typically, before the start of each year, more than 70% of our annual revenue has been committed under contracts in our combined Buy and Watch segments, which provides us with a high degree of stability for our revenue and allows us to effectively manage our profitability and cash flows.
We continue to look for growth opportunities through global expansion, specifically within emerging markets, as well as through the cross-platform expansion of our analytical services and measurement services.
Our restructuring and other productivity initiatives have been focused on a combination of improving operating leverage through targeted cost-reduction programs, business process improvements and portfolio restructuring actions, while at the same time investing in key programs to enhance future growth opportunities.
Achieving our business objectives requires us to manage a number of key risk areas.
Our growth objective of geographic market and service expansion requires us to maintain the consistency and integrity of our information and underlying processes on a global scale, and to invest effectively our capital in technology and infrastructure to keep pace with our clients’ demands and our competitors.
Core to managing these key risk areas is our commitment to data privacy and security as it drives our ability to deliver quality insights for our clients in line with evolving regulatory requirements and governing standards across all the geographies and industries in which we operate.
Our operating footprint across more than 100 countries requires disciplined global and local resource management of internal and third party providers to ensure success.
In addition, our high level of indebtedness requires active management of our debt profile, with a focus on underlying maturities, interest rate risk, liquidity and operating cash flows.
Business Segment Overview We align our business into two reporting segments: what consumers buy (consumer purchasing measurement and analytics), and what consumers watch and listen to (media audience measurement and analytics).
Our Buy and Watch segments are built on a foundation of proprietary data assets that are designed to yield essential insights for our clients to successfully measure, analyze and grow their businesses.
31 Our Buy segment provides measurement services, which include our core tracking and scan data (primarily transactional measurement data and consumer behavior information), and analytical services to businesses in the consumer packaged goods industry.
Our services also enable our clients to better manage their brands, uncover new sources of demand, launch and grow new products, analyze their sales, improve their marketing mix and establish more effective consumer relationships.
Our data is used by our clients to measure their market share, tracking billions of sales transactions per month in retail outlets around the world.
Our extensive database of retail and consumer information, combined with our advanced analytical capabilities, helps generate strategic insights that influence our clients’ key business decisions.
Within our Buy segment, we have two primary geographic groups, developed and emerging markets.
Developed markets primarily include the United States, Canada, Western Europe, Japan, Australia and South Korea while emerging markets primarily include Africa, Latin America, Eastern Europe, Russia, China, India and Southeast Asia.
Our Watch segment provides viewership and listening data and analytics primarily to the media and advertising industries for television, radio, digital and mobile viewing and listening platforms.
Our Watch data is used by our media clients to understand their audiences, establish the value of their advertising inventory and maximize the value of their content, and by our advertising clients to plan and optimize their spending.
Certain corporate costs, other than those described above, including those related to selling, finance, legal, human resources, and information technology systems, are considered operating costs and are allocated to our segments based on either the actual amount of costs incurred or on a basis consistent with the operations of the underlying segment.
Critical Accounting Policies The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”).
The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
The most significant of these policies relate to: revenue recognition; business combinations including purchase price allocations; accruals for pension costs and other post-retirement benefits; accounting for income taxes; and valuation of long-lived assets including goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, computer software and stock-based compensation.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the valuation of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
We evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis.
Actual results could vary from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
For a summary of the significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policies discussed below, see Note 1 – “Description of Business, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies” – to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition We recognize revenues when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, services have been rendered or information has been delivered, the fee is fixed or determinable and the collectability of the related revenue is reasonably assured.
A significant portion of our revenue is generated from information (primarily retail measurement and consumer panel services) and measurement (primarily from television, radio, internet and mobile audiences) services.
We generally recognize revenue from the sale of services as the services are performed and delivered to the consumer, which is usually ratably over the term of the contract(s).
Invoiced amounts are recorded as deferred revenue until earned.
Substantially all of our customer contracts are non-cancelable and non-refundable.
Certain of our revenue arrangements include multiple deliverables and in these arrangements, the individual deliverables within the contract that have stand-alone value to the customer are separated and recognized upon delivery based upon our best estimate of their selling prices.
These arrangements are not significant to our results of operations.
In certain cases, software is included as part of these arrangements to allow our customers to view delivered information and is provided for the term of the arrangement and is not significant to the marketing effort and is not sold separately.
Accordingly, software provided to our customers is considered to be incidental to the arrangements and is not recognized as a separate element.
A discussion of our revenue recognition policies, by segment, follows: Buy Revenue from our Buy segment, primarily from retail measurement services and consumer panel services, is recognized over the period during which the services are performed and information is delivered to the customer, primarily on a straight-line basis.
32 We also provide insights and solutions to customers through analytical studies that are recognized into revenue as value is delivered to the customer.
The pattern of revenue recognition for these contracts varies depending on the terms of the individual contracts, and may be recognized proportionally or deferred until the end of the contract term and recognized when the information has been delivered to the customer.
Watch Revenue from our Watch segment is primarily generated from television, radio, digital and mobile measurement services and recognized over the contract period, as the service is delivered to the customer, primarily on a straight-line basis.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense Recognition Our stock-based compensation programs are comprised of both stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”).
We measure the cost of all stock-based payments, including stock options, at fair value on the grant date and recognize such costs within the consolidated statements of operations; however, no expense is recognized for stock-based payments that do not ultimately vest.
We recognize expense associated with stock-based payments that vest upon a single date using the straight-line method.
For those that vest over time, an accelerated graded vesting is used.
We recorded $45 million, $51 million and $48 million of expense associated with stock-based compensation for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
As of December 31, 2017, the aggregate grant date fair value of all outstanding vested and unvested options was $30 million and $13 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2017, approximately $49 million of unearned stock-based compensation related to unvested RSUs (net of estimated forfeitures) is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 3.4 years.
Fair Value Measurement Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires considerable judgment.
Stock-based compensation expense for time-based stock options is primarily based on the estimated grant date fair value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which considers factors such as estimating the expected term of stock options, expected volatility of our stock, and the number of stock-based awards expected to be forfeited due to future terminations.
Some of the critical assumptions used in estimating the grant date fair value are presented in the table below: Year Ended December 31, 2017 2016 2015 Expected life (years) 4.50 4.50-5.25 4.50-5.25 Risk-free interest rate 2.02% 1.19-1.92 % 1.27-1.58 % Expected dividend yield 3.76% 2.29-2.90 % 2.18- 2.45 % Expected volatility 22.01% 20.02-23.44 % 23.44-23.70 % Weighted-average volatility 22.01% 20.89 % 23.56 % We consider the historical option exercise behavior of our employees in estimating the expected life of our options granted, which we believe are representative of future behavior.
For 2017, 2016 and 2015, expected volatility was based on our historical volatility.
In addition, for stock-based awards where vesting is dependent upon achieving certain operating performance goals, we estimate the likelihood of achieving the performance goals.
The total number of performance restricted share units to be earned is subject to achievement of cumulative performance goals for the three year period.
Forty percent of the target award will be determined based on the Company’s relative total shareholder return and sixty percent of the target award will be determined based on free cash flow achievements.
The maximum payout is 200% of target.
The fair value of the target award related to free cash flow was the fair value on the date of the grant, and the fair value of the target awards related to relative shareholder return was based on the Monte Carlo model.
Differences between actual results and these estimates could have a material effect on our financial results.
The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent our best estimates and, although we believe them to be reasonable, these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment.
If factors change and we employ different assumptions in the application of our option-pricing model in future periods or if we experience different forfeiture rates, the compensation expense that is derived may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current year.
33 Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include cash and short-term, highly liquid investments with an original maturity date of three months or less.
Cash and cash equivalents are carried at fair value.
Accounts Receivable The Company extends non-interest bearing trade credit to its customers in the ordinary course of business.
To minimize credit risk, ongoing credit evaluations of client’s financial condition are performed.
An estimate of the allowance for doubtful accounts is made when collection of the full amount is no longer probable or returns are expected.
During the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, we sold $202 million and $137 million, respectively, of accounts receivables to third parties and recorded an immaterial loss on the sales to interest expense, net in the consolidated statement of operations.
As of December 31, 2017 and 2016, $110 million and $71 million, respectively, remained outstanding.
The sales were accounted for as true sales, without recourse.
We maintain servicing responsibilities of the receivables, for which the related costs are not significant.
The proceeds of $202 million and $137 million from the sales were reported as a component of the changes in trade and other receivables, net within operating activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are stated at historical cost less accumulated impairment losses, if any.
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets, consisting of certain trade names and trademarks, are each tested for impairment on an annual basis and whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such asset may not be recoverable.
We have designated October 1st as the date in which the annual assessment is performed as this timing corresponds with the development of our formal budget and business plan review.
We review the recoverability of our goodwill by comparing the estimated fair values of reporting units with their respective carrying amounts.
We established, and continue to evaluate, our reporting units based on our internal reporting structure and define such reporting units at our operating segment level or one level below.
The estimates of fair value of a reporting unit are determined using a combination of valuation techniques, primarily by an income approach using a discounted cash flow analysis and supplemented by a market-based approach.
A discounted cash flow analysis requires the use of various assumptions, including expectations of future cash flows, growth rates, discount rates and tax rates in developing the present value of future cash flow projections.
Many of the factors used in assessing fair value are outside of the control of management, and these assumptions and estimates can change in future periods.
Changes in assumptions or estimates could materially affect the determination of the fair value of a reporting unit, and therefore could affect the amount of potential impairment.
The following assumptions are significant to our discounted cash flow analysis: • Business projections – expected future cash flows and growth rates are based on assumptions about the level of business activity in the marketplace as well as applicable cost levels that drive our budget and business plans.
The budget and business plans are updated at least annually and are frequently reviewed by management and our Board of Directors.
Actual results of operations, cash flows and other factors will likely differ from the estimates used in our valuation, and it is possible that differences and changes could be material.
A deterioration in profitability, adverse market conditions and a slower or weaker economic recovery than currently estimated by management could have a significant impact on the estimated fair value of our reporting units and could result in an impairment charge in the future.
Should such events or circumstances arise, management would evaluate other options available at that time that, if executed, could result in future profitability.
• Long-term growth rates – the assumed long-term growth rate representing the expected rate at which a reporting unit’s earnings stream, beyond that of the budget and business plan period, is projected to grow.
These rates are used to calculate the terminal value, or value at the end of the future earnings stream, of our reporting units, and are added to the cash flows projected for the budget and business plan period.
The long-term growth rate for each reporting unit is influenced by general market conditions as well as factors specific to the reporting unit such as the maturity of the underlying services.
The long-term growth rates we used for each of our reporting units in our 2017 evaluation were between 2.5% and 3.0%.
• Discount rates – the reporting unit’s combined future cash flows are discounted at a rate that is consistent with a weighted-average cost of capital that is likely to be used by market participants.
The weighted-average cost of capital is our estimate of the overall after-tax rate of return required by equity and debt holders of a business enterprise.
The discount rate for each reporting unit is influenced by general market conditions as well as factors specific to the reporting unit.
The discount rates we used in our 2017 evaluation of our reporting units were between 9.0% and 12.0%.
34 These estimates and assumptions vary between each reporting unit depending on the facts and circumstances specific to that unit.
We believe that the estimates and assumptions we made are reasonable, but they are susceptible to change from period to period.
We also use a market-based approach in estimating the fair value of our reporting units.
The market-based approach utilizes available market comparisons such as indicative industry multiples that are applied to current year revenue and earnings as well as recent comparable transactions.
To validate the reasonableness of the reporting unit fair values, we reconcile the aggregate fair values of our reporting units to our enterprise market capitalization.
Enterprise market capitalization includes, among other factors, the market value of our common stock and the appropriate redemption values of our debt.
We did not have any indicators of impairment during the year ended December 31, 2017 that would require us to perform an interim impairment assessment.
The following table summarizes the results of the three reporting units that were subject to the October 1, 2017 annual impairment testing and the related goodwill value associated with the reporting units for (a) fair values exceeding carrying values by less than 10%, (b) fair values exceeding carrying values between 10% and 20%, and (c) fair values exceeding carrying values by more than 20%.
The table below represents the reporting units goodwill balances as of December 31, 2017.
Fair value exceeds carrying value by: Number of reporting units Reporting units goodwill (in millions) Less than 10% 1 $ 316 10% to 20% — — Greater than 20% 2 8,179 Total 3 $ 8,495 We perform sensitivity analyses on our assumptions, primarily around both long-term growth rate and discount rate assumptions.
Our sensitivity analyses include several combinations of reasonably possible scenarios with regard to these assumptions.
However, we consistently test a one percent movement in both our long-term growth rate and discount rate assumptions.
When applying these sensitivity analyses, we noted that the fair value was greater than the underlying book value for all of our reporting units.
While management believes that these sensitivity analyses provide a reasonable basis on which to evaluate the recovery of our goodwill, other facts or circumstances may arise that could impact the impairment assessment and therefore these analyses should not be used as a sole predictor of impairment.
The impairment test for other indefinite-lived intangible assets consists of a comparison of the fair value of the intangible asset with its carrying amount.
If the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess.
The estimates of fair value of trade names and trademarks are determined using a “relief from royalty” discounted cash flow valuation methodology.
Significant assumptions inherent in this methodology include estimates of royalty rates and discount rates.
Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the respective intangible assets.
Assumptions about royalty rates are based on the rates at which comparable trade names and trademarks are being licensed in the marketplace.
Pension Costs We provide a number of retirement benefits to our employees, including defined benefit pension plans and post-retirement medical plans.
Pension costs, in respect of defined benefit pension plans, primarily represent the increase in the actuarial present value of the obligation for pension benefits based on employee service during the year and the interest on this obligation in respect of employee service in previous years, net of the expected return on plan assets.
Differences between this expected return and the actual return on these plan assets and actuarial changes are not recognized in the statement of operations, unless the accumulated differences and changes exceed a certain threshold.
The excess is amortized and charged to the statement of operations over, at the maximum, the average remaining term of employee service.
We recognize obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension plans as expenses in the statement of operations as they are incurred.
The determination of benefit obligations and expenses is based on actuarial models.
In order to measure benefit costs and obligations using these models, critical assumptions are made with regard to the discount rate, the expected return on plan assets and the assumed rate of compensation increases.
We provide retiree medical benefits to a limited number of participants in the U.S.
Therefore, retiree medical care cost trend rates are not a significant driver of our post retirement costs.
Management reviews these critical assumptions at least annually.
Other assumptions involve demographic factors such as turnover, retirement and mortality rates.
Management reviews these assumptions periodically and updates them as necessary.
35 The discount rate is the rate at which the benefit obligations could be effectively settled.
For our U.S. plans, the discount rate is based on a bond portfolio that includes only long-term bonds with an Aa rating, or equivalent, from a major rating agency.
For the Dutch and other non-U.S. plans, the discount rate is set by reference to market yields on high-quality corporate bonds.
We believe the timing and amount of cash flows related to the bonds in these portfolios are expected to match the estimated payment benefit streams of our plans.
Effective January 1, 2016, we changed our approach to calculating the discount rate for our retirement benefit pension plans from a weighted-average yield curve approach to a spot-rate approach.
Under the spot-rate approach, we use individual spot rates along the yield curve that correspond with the timing of each future cash outflow for benefit payments in order to calculate interest cost and service cost within net periodic benefit costs.
The spot-rate approach represents a more precise measurement of interest and service cost.
The new approach represents a change in accounting estimate that is inseparable from a change in accounting principle and accordingly is accounted for prospectively.
To determine the expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets, we consider, for each country, the structure of the asset portfolio and the expected rates of return for each of the components.
For our U.S. plans, a 50 basis point decrease in the expected return on assets would increase pension expense on our principal plans by approximately $1 million per year.
A similar 50 basis point decrease in the expected return on assets would increase pension expense on our principal Dutch plans by approximately $3 million per year.
We assumed that the weighted-averages of long-term returns on our pension plans were 4.6% for the year ended December 31, 2017, 5.1% for the year ended December 31, 2016 and 6.0% for the year ended December 31, 2015.
The expected long-term rate of return is applied to the fair value of pension plan assets.
The actual return on plan assets will vary year to year from this assumption.
Although the actual return on plan assets will vary from year to year, it is appropriate to use long-term expected forecasts in selecting our expected return on plan assets.
As such, there can be no assurance that our actual return on plan assets will approximate the long-term expected forecasts.
Income Taxes We have a presence in more than 100 countries.
We have completed many material acquisitions and divestitures which have generated complex tax issues requiring management to use its judgment to make various tax determinations.
We try to organize the affairs of our subsidiaries in a tax efficient manner, taking into consideration the jurisdictions in which we operate.
Although we are confident that tax returns have been appropriately prepared and filed, there is risk that additional tax may be assessed on certain transactions or that the deductibility of certain expenditures may be disallowed for tax purposes.
Our policy is to estimate tax risk to the best of our ability and provide accordingly for those risks and take positions in which a high degree of confidence exists that the tax treatment will be accepted by the tax authorities.
The policy with respect to deferred taxation is to provide in full for temporary differences using the liability method.
Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are computed by assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes.
The carrying value of deferred tax assets is adjusted by a valuation allowance to the extent that these deferred tax assets are not considered to be realized on a more likely than not basis.
Realization of deferred tax assets is based, in part, on our judgment and various factors including reversal of deferred tax liabilities, our ability to generate future taxable income in jurisdictions where such assets have arisen and potential tax planning strategies.
Valuation allowances are recorded in order to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized in the future.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “TCJ Act”) was enacted in December of 2017.
The TCJ Act reduces the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent, effective as of January 1, 2018, and creates a territorial-style taxing system.
The TCJ Act also requires companies to pay a one-time transition tax on earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries that were previously deferred and also creates new taxes on certain types of foreign earnings.
We are subject to the provisions of the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") ASC 740-10, Income Taxes, which requires that the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates be recognized in the period the tax rate change was enacted.
In December of 2017, the SEC staff issued SAB 118 which provides that companies that have not completed their accounting for the effects of the TCJ Act but can determine a reasonable estimate of those effects should include a provisional amount based on their reasonable estimate in their financial statements.
The guidance in SAB 118 also allows companies to adjust the provisional amounts during a one year measurement period which is similar to the measurement period used when accounting for business combinations.
As of December 31, 2017, we have not completed our accounting for all of the tax effects associated with the enactment of the TCJ Act.
However, we have, in certain cases made a reasonable estimate of the (a) effects on our existing deferred tax balances, and (b) the one-time transition tax.
Consequently, our fourth quarter of 2017 and full year 2017 results of operations reflect a non-cash provisional net expense of $104 million.
See Note 13 – “Income Taxes” - to the consolidated financial statements for more information relating to these items.
36 We record a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
Such tax positions are, based solely on their technical merits, more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities and reflect the largest amount of benefit, determined on a cumulative probability basis that is more likely than not to be realized upon settlement with the applicable taxing authority with full knowledge of all relevant information.
We recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
Long-Lived Assets We are required to assess whether the value of our long-lived assets, including our buildings, improvements, technical and other equipment, and amortizable intangible assets have been impaired whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets might not be recoverable.
We do not perform a periodic assessment of assets for impairment in the absence of such information or indicators.
Conditions that would necessitate an impairment assessment include a significant decline in the observable market value of an asset, a significant change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used or a significant adverse change that would indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets is not recoverable.
Recoverability of assets that are held and used is measured by comparing the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows expected to be derived from an asset (or a group of assets) to their carrying value.
If the carrying value of the asset (or the group of assets) exceeds the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows, impairment is considered to exist.
If impairment is considered to exist based on undiscounted cash flows, the impairment charge is measured using an estimation of the assets’ fair value, typically using a discounted cash flow method.
The identification of impairment indicators, the estimation of future cash flows and the determination of fair values for assets (or groups of assets) requires us to make significant judgments concerning the identification and validation of impairment indicators, expected cash flows and applicable discount rates.
These estimates are subject to revision as market conditions and our assessments change.
No impairment indicators were noted for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015.
We capitalize software development costs with respect to major internal use software initiatives or enhancements.
The costs are capitalized from the time that the preliminary project stage is completed, and we consider it probable that the software will be used to perform the function intended until the time the software is placed in service for its intended use.
Once the software is placed in service, the capitalized costs are generally amortized over periods of three to seven years.
If events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of software may not be recovered, a recoverability analysis is performed based on estimated undiscounted cash flows to be generated from the software in the future.
If the analysis indicates that the carrying value is not recoverable from future cash flows, the software cost is written down to estimated fair value and an impairment is recognized.
These estimates are subject to revision as market conditions and as our assessments change.
There were no impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2017.
Factors Affecting Nielsen’s Financial Results Acquisitions, Dispositions and Investments in Affiliates Acquisitions On February 1, 2017, we completed the acquisition of Gracenote Inc., Gracenote Canada, Inc., Gracenote Netherlands Holdings B.V., Tribune Digital Ventures, LLC, and Tribune International Holdco, LLC (each, a “Gracenote Company” and together “Gracenote”) through the purchase of 100% of each Gracenote Company’s outstanding common stock from Tribune Media Company for a total purchase price of $585 million.
We acquired the data and technology that underpins the programming guides and personalized user experience for major video, music, audio and sports content.
This acquisition expands our footprint with major clients including Gracenote’s global content database which spans across platforms including multichannel video programming distributors (MVPD’s), smart television, streaming music services, connected devices, media players and in-car infotainment systems.
The acquisition of Gracenote was accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting which requires, among other things, the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed be recognized at their fair values as of the acquisition date.
Effective February 1, 2017, the financial results of Gracenote were included within the Watch segment of our consolidated financial statements.
For the year ended December, 31, 2017, our consolidated statement of operations includes $215 million of revenues related to the Gracenote acquisition.
37 The purchase price was allocated based upon the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition using available information and certain assumptions management believed reasonable.
The following table summarizes the purchase price allocation: (IN MILLIONS) Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed: Cash $ 11 Other current assets 56 Property and equipment 12 Goodwill 316 Amortizable intangible assets 341 Other long-term assets 11 Deferred revenue (22 ) Other current liabilities (28 ) Deferred tax liabilities (105 ) Other long-term liabilities (7 ) Total $ 585 As of the acquisition date, the fair value of accounts receivable approximated historical cost.
The gross contractual receivable was $37 million and is included in other current assets above, of which $1 million was deemed uncollectible.
The allocation of the purchase price to goodwill and identified intangible assets was $316 million and $341 million, respectively.
All of the Gracenote related goodwill and intangible assets are attributable to our Watch segment.
As of December 31, 2017, $21 million of goodwill is expected to be deductible for income tax purposes.
Intangible assets and their estimated useful lives consist of the following: (IN MILLIONS) Description Amount Useful Life Customer-related intangibles $ 109 10 - 15 years Content database 168 12 - 16 years Trade names and trademarks 7 5 years Computer software 57 7-8 years Total $ 341 Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the consideration transferred over the net assets recognized and represents expected synergies and the going concern nature of Gracenote.
We incurred acquisition-related expenses of $6 million for the year ended December 31, 2017, which primarily consisted of transaction fees, legal, accounting and other professional services that are included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of operations.
The following unaudited pro forma information presents the consolidated results of operations of us and Gracenote for the year ended December 31, 2017, as if the acquisition had occurred on January 1, 2016, with pro forma adjustments to give effect to amortization of intangible assets, an increase in interest expense from acquisition financing, and certain other adjustments: Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 Revenues $ 6,590 $ 6,532 Income $ 443 $ 499 The unaudited pro forma results do not reflect any synergies and are not necessarily indicative of the results that we would have attained had the acquisition of Gracenote been completed as of the beginning of the reporting period.
For the year ended December 31, 2017, excluding Gracenote, we paid cash consideration of $210 million associated with both current period and previously executed acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Had these 2017 acquisitions occurred as of January 1, 2017, the impact on our consolidated results of operations would not have been material.
38 For the year ended December 31, 2016, we paid cash consideration of $285 million associated with both current period and previously executed acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Had these 2016 acquisitions occurred as of January 1, 2016, the impact on our consolidated results of operations would not have been material.
For the year ended December 31, 2015, we paid cash consideration of $246 million associated with both current period and previously executed acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Included in this amount is $45 million for an additional 13.5% interest in Nielsen Catalina Solutions, a joint venture between us and Catalina (“NCS”) that we historically accounted for under the equity method of accounting.
As part of this transaction we gained control of NCS and, as such accounted for it as a step-acquisition and calculated the fair value of the investment immediately before the acquisition to be $161 million.
As a result, during the fourth quarter of 2015, we recorded a $158 million gain on the investment in NCS to other income/(expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations.
Commencing October 1, 2015, NCS was reflected as a consolidated subsidiary within our consolidated financial statements.
Had these 2015 acquisitions occurred as of January 1, 2015, the impact on our consolidated results of operations would not have been material.
Dispositions In December 2016, we completed the sale of Claritas, a business focusing on consumer segmentation insights within our Buy segment, for cash consideration of $34 million and a note receivable for $60 million.
The note is payable at any time over three years and bears interest at 3% in year one, 5% in year two and 7% in year three.
As a result of this transaction we recorded a $14 million gain on the sale to other income/(expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations.
This disposition did not qualify to be classified as a discontinued operation.
In 2017, upon finalization of working capital and other settlement matters, we reduced the note receivable to $51 million and recorded a charge of $13 million to other income/(expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations.
In November 2015, we completed the sale of the National Research Group, Inc., a leader in providing market research to movie studios within our Watch segment, for total cash consideration of $34 million and recorded an $18 million gain on the sale to other income/(expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations.
This disposition did not qualify to be classified as a discontinued operation.
Income Taxes The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “TCJ Act”) was enacted in December of 2017.
The Act reduces the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent, effective as of January 1, 2018, and creates a territorial-style taxing system.
The TCJ Act also requires companies to pay a one-time transition tax on earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries that were previously deferred and also creates new taxes on certain types of foreign earnings.
We are subject to the provisions of the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") ASC 740-10, Income Taxes, which requires that the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates be recognized in the period the tax rate change was enacted.
In December of 2017, the SEC staff issued SAB 118, which provides that companies that have not completed their accounting for the effects of the TCJ Act but can determine a reasonable estimate of those effects should include a provisional amount based on their reasonable estimate in their financial statements.
The guidance in SAB 118 also allows companies to adjust the provisional amounts during a one year measurement period which is similar to the measurement period used when accounting for business combinations.
As of December 31, 2017, we have not completed our accounting for all of the tax effects associated with the enactment of the TCJ Act.
However, we have, in certain cases made a reasonable estimate of the (a) effects on our existing deferred tax balances, and (b) the one-time transition tax.
Consequently, our fourth quarter of 2017 and full year 2017 results of operations reflect a non-cash provisional expense of $104 million.
See Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information relating to these items.
Foreign Currency Our financial results are reported in U.S. dollars and are therefore subject to the impact of movements in exchange rates on the translation of the financial information of individual businesses whose functional currencies are other than U.S. dollars.
Our principal foreign exchange revenue exposure is spread across several currencies, primarily the Euro.
The table below sets forth the profile of our revenue by principal currency.
Year endedDecember 31,2017 Year endedDecember 31,2016 Year endedDecember 31,2015 U.S. Dollar 59 % 61 % 60 % Euro 10 % 9 % 9 % Other Currencies 31 % 30 % 31 % Total 100 % 100 % 100 % 39 As a result, fluctuations in the value of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar impact our operating results.
Impacts associated with fluctuations in foreign currency are discussed in more detail under “Item 7A.—Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk.” In countries with currencies other than the U.S. dollar, assets and liabilities are translated into U.S. dollars using end-of-period exchange rates; revenues, expenses and cash flows are translated using average rates of exchange.
The average U.S. dollar to Euro exchange rate was $1.13 to €1.00, $1.11 to €1.00 and $1.11 to €1.00 for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Constant currency growth rates used in the following discussion of results of operations eliminate the impact of year-over-year foreign currency fluctuations.
We evaluate our results of operations on both an as reported and a constant currency basis.
The constant currency presentation, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, excludes the impact of year-over-year fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
We believe providing constant currency information provides valuable supplemental information regarding our results of operations, thereby facilitating period-to-period comparisons of our business performance and is consistent with how management evaluates the Company’s performance.
We calculate constant currency percentages by converting our prior-period local currency financial results using the current period exchange rates and comparing these adjusted amounts to our current period reported results.
This calculation may differ from similarly-titled measures used by others and, accordingly, the constant currency presentation is not meant to be a substitution for recorded amounts presented in conformity with GAAP nor should such amounts be considered in isolation.
Results of Operations – Years Ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the amounts included in our consolidated statements of operations: Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Revenues $ 6,572 $ 6,309 $ 6,172 Cost of revenues, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 2,765 2,607 2,539 Selling, general and administrative expenses, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 1,862 1,851 1,915 Depreciation and amortization 640 603 574 Restructuring charges 80 105 51 Operating income 1,225 1,143 1,093 Interest income 4 4 4 Interest expense (374 ) (333 ) (311 ) Foreign currency exchange transaction losses, net (10 ) (6 ) (31 ) Other (expense)/income, net (17 ) 8 206 Income before income taxes and equity in net loss of affiliates 828 816 961 Provision for income taxes (388 ) (309 ) (383 ) Equity in net loss of affiliates — — (3 ) Net income 440 507 575 Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests 11 5 5 Net income attributable to Nielsen stockholders $ 429 $ 502 $ 570 Net Income to Adjusted EBITDA Reconciliation We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss from our consolidated statements of operations before interest income and expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, restructuring charges, stock-based compensation expense and other non-operating items from our consolidated statements of operations as well as certain other items considered outside the normal course of our operations specifically described below.
Restructuring charges: We exclude restructuring expenses, which primarily include employee severance, office consolidation and contract termination charges, from our Adjusted EBITDA to allow more accurate comparisons of the financial results to historical operations and forward-looking guidance.
By excluding these expenses from our non-GAAP measures, we are better able to evaluate our ability to utilize our existing assets and estimate the long-term value these assets will generate for us.
Furthermore, we believe that the adjustments of these items more closely correlate with the sustainability of our operating performance.
40 Stock-based compensation expense: We exclude the impact of costs relating to stock-based compensation.
Due to the subjective assumptions and a variety of award types, we believe that the exclusion of stock-based compensation expense, which is typically non-cash, allows for more meaningful comparisons of our operating results to peer companies.
Stock-based compensation expense can vary significantly based on the timing, size and nature of awards granted.
Other non-operating (expense)/income, net: We exclude foreign currency exchange transaction gains and losses primarily related to intercompany financing arrangements as well as other non-operating income and expense items, such as gains and losses recorded on business combinations or dispositions, sales of investments, net income attributable to noncontrolling interests and early redemption payments made in connection with debt refinancing.
We believe that the adjustments of these items more closely correlate with the sustainability of our operating performance.
Other items: To measure operating performance, we exclude certain expenses and gains that arise outside the ordinary course of our operations.
Such costs primarily include legal settlements, acquisition related expenses, business optimization costs and other transactional costs.
We believe the exclusion of such amounts allows management and the users of the financial statements to better understand our financial results.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a presentation made in accordance with GAAP, and our use of the term Adjusted EBITDA may vary from the use of similarly-titled measures by others in our industry due to the potential inconsistencies in the method of calculation and differences due to items subject to interpretation.
We use Adjusted EBITDA to measure our performance from period to period both at the consolidated level as well as within our operating segments, to evaluate and fund incentive compensation programs and to compare our results to those of our competitors.
In addition to Adjusted EBITDA being a significant measure of performance for management purposes, we also believe that this presentation provides useful information to investors regarding financial and business trends related to our results of operations and that when non-GAAP financial information is viewed with GAAP financial information, investors are provided with a more meaningful understanding of our ongoing operating performance.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net income or loss, operating income, cash flows from operating activities or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP as measures of operating performance or cash flows as measures of liquidity.
Adjusted EBITDA has important limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
The below table presents a reconciliation from net income to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015: Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Net income attributable to Nielsen stockholders $ 429 $ 502 $ 570 Interest expense, net 370 329 307 Provision for income taxes 388 309 383 Depreciation and amortization 640 603 574 EBITDA 1,827 1,743 1,834 Equity in net loss of affiliates — — 3 Other non-operating expense/(income), net 38 3 (170 ) Restructuring charges 80 105 51 Stock-based compensation expense 45 51 48 Other items(a) 45 36 92 Adjusted EBITDA $ 2,035 $ 1,938 $ 1,858 (a) For the year ended December 31, 2017, other items primarily consist of transaction related costs and business optimization costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2016, other items primarily consist of business optimization costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2015, other items primarily consists of a $36 million donation to the Nielsen Foundation, a $14 million charge for the partial settlement of certain U.S. pension plan participants, and business optimization costs.
Consolidated Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2017 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2016 Revenues Revenues increased 4.2% to $6,572 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 from $6,309 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, or an increase of 3.8% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.4% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Revenues within our Buy segment decreased 2.7%, or 3.3% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.6% 41 unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Revenues within our Watch segment increased 11.9%, or 11.7% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.2% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Refer to the “Business Segment Results” section for further discussion of our revenue performance.
Cost of Revenues, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization Cost of revenues increased 6.1% to $2,765 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 from $2,607 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, or an increase of 5.7% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.4% favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Costs within our Buy segment increased 0.7%, or 0.1% on a constant currency basis.
Excluding a 0.6% favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, cost of revenues increased primarily due to the continued global investment in our services.
Costs within our Watch segment increased 11.2% on a reported and constant currency basis.
Cost of revenues increased primarily due to the impact of the Gracenote acquisition.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 0.6% to $1,862 for the year ended December 31, 2017 from $1,851 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, or 0.5% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.1% favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Costs within our Buy segment decreased 5.7%, or 5.8% on a constant currency basis.
Excluding a 0.1% favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, selling, general and administrative expenses decreased due to productivity initiatives including dispositions as we continue to execute our portfolio pruning initiatives.
Costs within our Watch segment increased 17.9%, or 17.7% on a constant currency basis.
Excluding a 0.2% favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, selling, general and administrative expenses increased primarily due to the impact of the Gracenote acquisition.
Depreciation and Amortization Depreciation and amortization expense was $640 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 as compared to $603 million for the year ended December 31, 2016.
This increase was primarily due to higher depreciation and amortization expense associated with tangible and intangible assets acquired as part of the Gracenote acquisition on February 1, 2017.
Depreciation and amortization expense associated with tangible and intangibles assets acquired in business combinations increased to $219 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 from $210 million for the year ended December 31, 2016.
Restructuring Charges We recorded $80 million and $105 million in restructuring charges primarily related to employee severance associated with productivity initiatives and contract termination costs for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
Operating Income Operating income for the year ended December 31, 2017 was $1,225 million compared to operating income of $1,143 million for the year ended December 31, 2016.
Operating income within our Buy segment decreased to $322 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 from $331 million for the year ended December 31, 2016.
Operating income within our Watch segment increased to $1,033 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 from $935 million for the year ended December 31, 2016.
Corporate operating expenses increased to $130 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 from $123 million for the year ended December 31, 2016.
Interest Expense Interest expense was $374 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 compared to $333 million for the year ended December 31, 2016.
This increase is primarily related to higher average debt balances including the incurrence of an additional $500 million 5.00% Senior Notes in January 2017 and higher USD LIBOR senior secured term loan interest rates.
42 Foreign Currency Exchange Transaction Losses, Net Foreign currency exchange transaction losses, net, represent the net loss on revaluation of certain cash, external debt, intercompany loans and other receivables and payables.
Fluctuations in the value of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. Dollar, particularly the Euro, have a significant effect on our operating results.
The average U.S. Dollar to Euro exchange rate was $1.13 to €1.00 and $1.11 to €1.00 for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
We realized net losses of $10 million for the year ended December 31, 2017, resulting primarily from fluctuations in certain foreign currencies associated with intercompany transactions.
We realized net losses of $6 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, resulting primarily from fluctuations in certain foreign currencies associated with intercompany transactions and the loss of $5 million from the revaluation of our U.S.-denominated debt and cash held in EURO functional entities, partially offset by a gain of $1 million associated with foreign currency derivative financial instruments.
Other (Expense)/Income, Net Other expense, net of $17 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 is primarily related to the finalization of working capital and other matters associated with dispositions.
Other income, net of $8 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 is primarily related to the gain of $14 million on the dispositions partially offset by the loss of $4 million related to certain costs incurred in connection with the B-3 term loan refinancing.
Income Before Income Taxes and Equity in Net Income of Affiliates Income was $828 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 compared to $816 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 due primarily to the consolidated results mentioned above.
Income Taxes The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016 were 47% and 38%, respectively.
Our effective tax rate of 47% for the year ended December 31, 2017 was significantly impacted by the TCJ Act.
Those impacts are described further in Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Excluding the impact of the TCJ Act, our effective tax rate was 34% for the year ended December 31, 2017.
It was higher than the UK statutory rate as a result of the impact of the TCJ Act as well as tax rate differences in other jurisdictions where the Company files tax returns, the effect of global licensing activities, withholding and foreign taxes as well as state and local income taxes, offset by the favorable impact of certain financing activities and releases of valuation allowances.
The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2016 was higher than the UK statutory rate as a result of the impact of tax rate differences in other jurisdictions where the Company files tax returns, the effect of global licensing activities, withholding and foreign taxes as well as state and local income taxes, offset by the favorable impact of certain financing activities, windfall tax benefits from stock option exercises and releases of uncertain tax positions.
At December 31, 2017 and 2016, we had gross uncertain tax positions of $452 million and $432 million, respectively.
We also have accrued interest and penalties associated with these uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 of $53 million and $33 million, respectively.
Estimated interest and penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes is classified as a component of our provision or benefit for income taxes.
It is reasonably possible that a reduction in a range of $5 million to $18 million of uncertain tax positions may occur within the next twelve months as a result of projected resolutions of worldwide tax disputes.
Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries where statutory rates are lower and earnings being higher than anticipated in countries where statutory rates are higher, or by changes in tax laws, regulations, accounting principles, or interpretations thereof.
Other factors that may affect our effective income tax rate include, but are not limited to, the requirement to exclude from our quarterly worldwide effective income tax calculations losses in jurisdictions where no income tax benefit can be recognized, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, the establishment of valuation allowances against deferred income tax assets if we determined that it is more likely than not that future income tax benefits will not be realized, and audits by taxing authorities.
43 Adjusted EBITDA Adjusted EBITDA increased 5.0% to $2,035 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 from $1,938 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, or 4.3% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.7% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Our Adjusted EBITDA margin increased to 30.96% for the year ended December 31, 2017 from 30.72% for the year ended December 31, 2016.
See “Results of Operations – Years Ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015” for the reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA.
Consolidated Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2016 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2015 Revenues Revenues increased 2.2% to $6,309 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 from $6,172 million for the year ended December 31, 2015, or an increase of 4.1% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 1.9% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Revenues within our Buy segment decreased 0.7%, or an increase of 2.3% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 3.0% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Revenues within our Watch segment increased 5.7%, or 6.3% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.6% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Refer to the “Business Segment Results” section for further discussion of our revenue performance.
Cost of Revenues, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization Cost of revenues increased 2.7% to $2,607 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 from $2,539 million for the year ended December 31, 2015, or an increase of 5.0% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 2.3% favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Costs within our Buy segment decreased 1.1%, or an increase of 2.4% on a constant currency basis.
Excluding a 3.3% favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, cost of revenues increased due to the continued global investments in our services.
Costs within our Watch segment increased 9.0%, or 9.8% on a constant currency basis.
Excluding a 0.8% favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, cost of revenues increased due to higher spending on product portfolio management initiatives, including our digital and Marketing Effectiveness product offerings.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 3.3% to $1,851 for the year ended December 31, 2016 from $1,915 million for the year ended December 31, 2015, or a decrease of 1.2% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 2.1% favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Costs within our Buy segment decreased 0.2%, or an increase of 2.7% on a constant currency basis.
Excluding a 2.9% favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, selling, general and administrative expenses increased due to continued global investments associated with our services.
Costs within our Watch segment decreased 2.7%, or a decrease of 1.8% on a constant currency basis.
Excluding a 0.9% favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, selling, general and administrative expenses decreased due to the impact of productivity initiatives.
Corporate costs decreased by $47 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, primarily due to a $36 million donation to the Nielsen Foundation and a $14 million charge for the partial settlement of certain U.S. pension plans for the year ended December 31, 2015.
Depreciation and Amortization Depreciation and amortization expense was $603 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 as compared to $574 million for the year ended December 31, 2015.
This increase was primarily due to higher depreciation and amortization expense associated with assets acquired in business combinations and higher capital expenditures.
Depreciation and amortization expense associated with tangible and intangibles assets acquired in business combinations increased to $210 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 from $205 million for the year ended December 31, 2015.
44 Restructuring Charges We recorded $105 million and $51 million in restructuring charges primarily related to employee severance associated with productivity initiatives and contract termination costs for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Operating Income Operating income for the year ended December 31, 2016 was $1,143 million compared to operating income of $1,093 million for the year ended December 31, 2015.
Operating income within our Buy segment decreased to $331 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 from $369 million for the year ended December 31, 2015.
Operating income within our Watch segment increased to $935 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 from $880 million for the year ended December 31, 2015.
Corporate operating expenses decreased to $123 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 from $156 million for the year ended December 31, 2015.
Interest Expense Interest expense was $333 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 compared to $311 million for the year ended December 31, 2015.
This increase is primarily due to higher average debt balances due to the incurrence of an additional $500 million in senior secured term loan in 2016 and higher USD LIBOR senior secured term loan interest rates.
Foreign Currency Exchange Transaction Losses, Net Foreign currency exchange transaction losses, net, represent the net loss on revaluation of certain cash, external debt, intercompany loans and other receivables and payables.
Fluctuations in the value of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. Dollar, particularly the Euro, have a significant effect on our operating results.
The average U.S. Dollar to Euro exchange rate was $1.11 to €1.00 for each of the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
We realized net losses of $6 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, resulting primarily from fluctuations in certain foreign currencies associated with intercompany transactions and the loss of $5 million from the revaluation of our U.S.-denominated debt and cash held in EURO functional entities, partially offset by a gain of $1 million associated with foreign currency derivative financial instruments.
We realized net losses of $31 million for the year ended December 31, 2015, resulting primarily from the revaluation of our U.S. denominated debt and cash held in Euro functional currency entities of $14 million, the devaluation of the Venezuelan bolivars of $8 million as discussed in the “Foreign Currency” section of “Factors Affecting Nielsen’s Financial Results,” as well as the fluctuations in certain foreign currencies associated with intercompany transactions, partially offset by a gain of $2 million associated with foreign currency derivative financial instruments.
Other Income/(expense), Net Other income, net of $8 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 is primarily related to the gain of $14 million on dispositions partially offset by the loss of $4 million related to certain costs incurred in connection with the B-3 term loan refinancing.
Other income, net of $206 million for the year ended December 31, 2015 is primarily related to the gains recorded from the step acquisition of Nielsen Catalina Solutions in the amount of $158 million, sale of an equity investment in the amount of $30 million and the disposition of National Research Group in the amount of $18 million.
Income from Before Income Taxes and Equity in Net Income of Affiliates Income was $816 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 compared to $961 million for the year ended December 31, 2015 due primarily to the consolidated results mentioned above.
Income Taxes The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015 were 38% and 40%, respectively.
The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2016 was higher than the UK statutory rate as a result of the impact of tax rate differences in other jurisdictions where the Company files tax returns, the effect of global licensing activities, withholding and foreign taxes as well as state and local income taxes, offset by the favorable impact of certain financing activities, windfall tax benefits from stock option exercises and releases of uncertain tax positions.
The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2015 was higher than the UK statutory rate as a result of the impact of tax rate differences in other jurisdictions where the Company files tax 45 returns, the effect of global licensing activities, withholding and foreign taxes as well as state and local income taxes, offset by the favorable impact of certain financing activities and foreign distributions.
At December 31, 2016 and 2015, we had gross uncertain tax positions of $432 million and $461 million, respectively.
We also have accrued interest and penalties associated with these uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2016 and 2015 of $33 million and $34 million, respectively.
Estimated interest and penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes is classified as a component of our provision or benefit for income taxes.
It is reasonably possible that a reduction in a range of $12 million to $20 million of uncertain tax positions may occur within the next twelve months as a result of projected resolutions of worldwide tax disputes.
Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries where statutory rates are lower and earnings being higher than anticipated in countries where statutory rates are higher, or by changes in tax laws, regulations, accounting principles, or interpretations thereof.
Adjusted EBITDA Adjusted EBITDA increased 4.3% to $1,938 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 from $1,858 million for the year ended December 31, 2015, or 5.2% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.9% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Our Adjusted EBITDA margin increased to 30.72% for the year ended December 31, 2016 from 30.10% for the year ended December 31, 2015.
See “Results of Operations – Years Ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015” for the reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA.
Business Segment Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2017 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2016 Revenues The table below sets forth our segment revenue performance data for the year ended December 31, 2017 compared to the year ended December 31, 2016, both on an as-reported and constant currency basis.
(IN MILLIONS) Year EndedDecember 31,2017 Year EndedDecember 31,2016 % Variance2017 vs. 2016Reported Year EndedDecember 31,2016ConstantCurrency % Variance2017 vs. 2016Constant Currency Emerging Markets $ 1,164 1,063 9.5 % 1,070 8.8 % Developed Markets 1,999 2,096 (4.6 )% 2,108 (5.2 )% Core Buy 3,163 3,159 0.1 % 3,178 (0.5 )% Corporate 68 163 (58.3 )% 163 (58.3 )% Buy Segment $ 3,231 $ 3,322 (2.7 )% $ 3,341 (3.3 )% Marketing Effectiveness $ 350 287 22.0 % 289 21.1 % Audio 501 500 0.2 % 500 0.2 % Audience Measurement (Video and Text) 2,308 $ 1,978 16.7 % $ 1,984 16.3 % Core Watch 3,159 2,765 14.2 % 2,773 13.9 % Corporate/Other Watch 182 222 (18.0 )% 218 (16.5 )% Watch Segment 3,341 2,987 11.9 % 2,991 11.7 % Total Core (Buy/Watch) 6,322 5,924 6.7 % 5,951 6.2 % Total $ 6,572 $ 6,309 4.2 % $ 6,332 3.8 % Buy Segment Revenues Revenues decreased 2.7% to $3,231 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 from $3,322 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, or 3.3% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.6% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
46 Revenues from emerging markets increased 9.5% to $1,164 million, or an increase of 8.8% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.7% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rates, revenue growth was driven by our global footprint, coverage expansion and broad product offerings which continue to position us well with both local and multinational clients.
For the year ended December 31, 2017, these investments drove double-digit growth in Latin America, India and Eastern Europe along with high single-digit growth in South East Asia and Africa.
Revenues from developed markets decreased 4.6% to $1,999 million, or 5.2% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.6% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rates, revenues decreased as a result of softness in the U.S. partially offset by growth in our European developed markets.
Revenues from Corporate Buy decreased 58.3% to $68 million on a reported and constant currency basis.
Corporate includes slow growth and non-core services that are part of portfolio pruning initiatives.
Watch Segment Revenues Revenues increased 11.9% to $3,341 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 from $2,987 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 or an increase of 11.7% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.2% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Excluding the Gracenote acquisition, revenues increased 4.7% (4.5% on a constant currency basis).
Excluding a 0.2% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, revenue growth was primarily driven by growth in Audience Measurement of Video and Text, which increased 16.7% (16.3% on a constant currency basis).
Excluding the Gracenote acquisition, Audience Measurement of Video and Text revenues increased 5.8% (5.5% on a constant currency basis), due to our ongoing investments and continued client adoption of our Total Audience Measurement initiative.
Audio revenues increased 0.2% on a reported and constant currency basis.
Our Marketing Effectiveness revenue grew 22.0% (21.1% on a constant currency basis), due to the continued strength in audience-based solutions, including data deliveries, that help advertisers and publishers measure the return on investment in media spend and investments in our product portfolio.
Corporate/Other Watch revenues decreased by 18.0% (16.5% on a constant currency basis) due to our continued exit of non-core media analytics products.
Our Core Watch revenue grew 14.2% (13.9% on a constant currency basis).
Excluding the Gracenote acquisition, our Core Watch revenue grew 6.5% (6.2% on a constant currency basis).
47 Business Segment Profitability We do not allocate items below operating income/(loss) to our business segments and therefore the tables below set forth a reconciliation of operating income/(loss) at the business segment level for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, adjusting for certain items affecting operating income/(loss), such as restructuring charges, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense and certain other items described below resulting in a presentation of our non-GAAP business segment profitability.
Non-GAAP business segment profitability provides useful supplemental information to management and investors regarding financial and business trends related to our results of operations.
When this non-GAAP financial information is viewed with our GAAP financial information, investors are provided with a meaningful understanding of our ongoing operating performance.
It is important to note that the non-GAAP business segment profitability corresponds in total to our consolidated Adjusted EBITDA described within our consolidated results of operations above, which our chief operating decision maker and other members of management use to measure our performance from period to period both at the consolidated level as well as within our operating segments, to evaluate and fund incentive compensation programs and to compare our results to those of our competitors.
These non-GAAP measures should not be considered as an alternative to net income, operating income, cash flows from operating activities or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP as measures of operating performance or cash flows as measures of liquidity.
These non-GAAP measures may differ from similarly-titled measures used by others and have important limitations as analytical tools.
Accordingly, they should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2017 (IN MILLIONS) OperatingIncome/(Loss) RestructuringCharges Depreciation andAmortization Stock-BasedCompensationExpense Other Items(1) Non-GAAPBusiness SegmentIncome/(Loss) Buy $ 322 $ 42 $ 210 $ 13 $ — $ 587 Watch 1,033 15 425 12 — 1,485 Corporate and Eliminations (130 ) 23 5 20 45 (37 ) Total Nielsen $ 1,225 $ 80 $ 640 $ 45 $ 45 $ 2,035 YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2016 (IN MILLIONS) OperatingIncome/(Loss) RestructuringCharges Depreciation andAmortization Stock-BasedCompensationExpense Other Items(1) Non-GAAPBusiness SegmentIncome/(Loss) Buy $ 331 $ 61 $ 212 $ 16 $ 3 $ 623 Watch 935 18 387 10 2 1,352 Corporate and Eliminations (123 ) 26 4 25 31 (37 ) Total Nielsen $ 1,143 $ 105 $ 603 $ 51 $ 36 $ 1,938 (1) For the year ended December 31, 2017, other items consist primarily of transaction related costs and business optimization costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2016, other items consist primarily of business optimization costs.
(IN MILLIONS) Year EndedDecember 31,2017 Year EndedDecember 31,2016 % Variance2017 vs. 2016Reported Year EndedDecember 31, 2016Constant Currency % Variance2017 vs. 2016Constant Currency Non-GAAP Business Segment Income/(Loss) Buy $ 587 $ 623 (5.8 )% $ 633 (7.3 )% Watch 1,485 1,352 9.8 % 1,355 9.6 % Corporate and Eliminations (37 ) (37 ) NA (37 ) NA Total Nielsen $ 2,035 $ 1,938 5.0 % $ 1,951 4.3 % Buy Segment Profitability Operating income was $322 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 as compared to $331 million for the year ended December 31, 2016.
The decrease was driven by the revenue performance discussed above, partially offset by lower restructuring charges.
Non-GAAP business segment income decreased 7.3% on a constant currency basis.
Watch Segment Profitability Operating income was $1,033 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 as compared to $935 million for the year ended December 31, 2016.
The increase was driven by the revenue performance discussed above, partially offset by higher depreciation and amortization expense.
Non-GAAP business segment income increased 9.6% on a constant currency basis.
48 Corporate Expenses and Eliminations Operating expenses were $130 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 as compared to $123 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, primarily due to an increase in transaction related costs and business optimization costs partially offset by the decrease in restructuring charges and stock-based compensation expense.
Business Segment Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2016 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2015 Revenues The table below sets forth our segment revenue performance data for the year ended December 31, 2016 compared to the year ended December 31, 2015, both on an as-reported and constant currency basis.
(IN MILLIONS) Year EndedDecember 31,2016 Year EndedDecember 31,2015 % Variance2016 vs. 2015Reported Year EndedDecember 31,2015ConstantCurrency % Variance2016 vs. 2015Constant Currency Emerging Markets $ 1,063 1,044 1.8 % 979 8.6 % Developed Markets 2,096 2,110 (0.7 )% 2,077 0.9 % Core Buy 3,159 3,154 0.2 % 3,056 3.4 % Corporate 163 191 (14.7 )% 191 (14.7 )% Buy Segment $ 3,322 $ 3,345 (0.7 )% $ 3,247 2.3 % Marketing Effectiveness $ 287 251 14.3 % 247 16.2 % Audio 500 504 (0.8 )% 503 (0.6 )% Audience Measurement (Video and Text) 1,978 $ 1,840 7.5 % $ 1,827 8.3 % Core Watch 2,765 2,595 6.6 % 2,577 7.3 % Corporate/Other Watch 222 232 (4.3 )% 234 (5.1 )% Watch Segment 2,987 2,827 5.7 % 2,811 6.3 % Total Core (Buy/Watch) 5,924 5,749 3.0 % 5,633 5.2 % Total $ 6,309 $ 6,172 2.2 % $ 6,058 4.1 % Buy Segment Revenues Revenues decreased 0.7% to $3,322 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 from $3,345 million for the year ended December 31, 2015, or an increase of 2.3% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 3.0% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Revenues from emerging markets increased 1.8% to $1,063 million, or an increase of 8.6% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 6.8% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rates, revenue growth was driven by our continued commitment to invest in coverage, which resulted in broad based demand for our services with both our multinational and local clients.
For the year ended December 31, 2016, these investments drove double-digit growth in South East Asia along with high single-digit growth in Latin America, Eastern Europe and China and mid single-digit growth in India.
Revenues from developed markets decreased 0.7% to $2,096 million, or an increase of 0.9% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 1.6% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rates, revenues increased as a result of modest strength in Western Europe, partially offset by softness in our U.S. market.
Revenues from Corporate Buy decreased 14.7% to $163 million on a reported and constant currency basis.
Corporate includes slow growth and non-core services that are part of portfolio pruning initiatives.
Watch Segment Revenues Revenues increased 5.7% to $2,987 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 from $2,827 million for the year ended December 31, 2015 or an increase of 6.3% on a constant currency basis, excluding a 0.6% unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rates, revenue growth was primarily driven by growth in Audience Measurement of Video and Text, which increased 7.5% (8.3% on a constant currency basis) due to our ongoing investments and continued client adoption of our Total Audience Measurement systems.
Audio revenues decreased 0.8% on a reported basis or 0.6% on a constant currency basis.
Our Marketing Effectiveness offerings grew 14.3% (16.2% on a constant currency basis), due to 49 our investments in our product portfolio and client’s growing demand for our advertising ROI and precision targeting tools.
Corporate/Other Watch revenues decreased by 4.3% (5.1% on a constant currency basis) due to the sale of the National Research Group, Inc., which was completed in the fourth quarter of 2015.
Our Core Watch services grew 6.6%, or 7.3% on a constant currency basis.
Business Segment Profitability We do not allocate items below operating income/(loss) to our business segments and therefore the tables below set forth a reconciliation of operating income/(loss) at the business segment level for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015, adjusting for certain items affecting operating income/(loss), such as restructuring charges, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense and certain other items described below resulting in a presentation of our non-GAAP business segment profitability.
Non-GAAP business segment profitability provides useful supplemental information to management and investors regarding financial and business trends related to our results of operations.
When this non-GAAP financial information is viewed with our GAAP financial information, investors are provided with a meaningful understanding of our ongoing operating performance.
It is important to note that the non-GAAP business segment profitability corresponds in total to our consolidated Adjusted EBITDA described within our consolidated results of operations above, which our chief operating decision maker and other members of management use to measure our performance from period to period both at the consolidated level as well as within our operating segments, to evaluate and fund incentive compensation programs and to compare our results to those of our competitors.
These non-GAAP measures should not be considered as an alternative to net income, operating income, cash flows from operating activities or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP as measures of operating performance or cash flows as measures of liquidity.
These non-GAAP measures may differ from similarly-titled measures used by others and have important limitations as analytical tools.
Accordingly, they should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2016 (IN MILLIONS) OperatingIncome/(Loss) RestructuringCharges Depreciation andAmortization Stock-BasedCompensationExpense Other Items(1) Non-GAAPBusiness SegmentIncome/(Loss) Buy $ 331 $ 61 $ 212 $ 16 $ 3 $ 623 Watch 935 18 387 10 2 1,352 Corporate and Eliminations (123 ) 26 4 25 31 (37 ) Total Nielsen $ 1,143 $ 105 $ 603 $ 51 $ 36 $ 1,938 YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2015 (IN MILLIONS) OperatingIncome/(Loss) RestructuringCharges Depreciation andAmortization Stock-BasedCompensationExpense Other Items(1) Non-GAAPBusiness SegmentIncome/(Loss) Buy $ 369 $ 32 $ 207 $ 15 $ 1 $ 624 Watch 880 14 363 8 4 1,269 Corporate and Eliminations (156 ) 5 4 25 87 (35 ) Total Nielsen $ 1,093 $ 51 $ 574 $ 48 $ 92 $ 1,858 (1) For the year ended December 31, 2016, other items consist primarily of business optimization costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2015, other items consist of a $36 million donation to the Nielsen Foundation, $14 million charge for the partial settlement of certain U.S. pension plans, and business optimization costs.
(IN MILLIONS) Year EndedDecember 31,2016 Year EndedDecember 31,2015 % Variance2016 vs. 2015Reported Year EndedDecember 31, 2015Constant Currency % Variance2016 vs. 2015Constant Currency Non-GAAP Business Segment Income/(Loss) Buy $ 623 $ 624 (0.2 )% $ 613 1.6 % Watch 1,352 1,269 6.5 % 1,264 7.0 % Corporate and Eliminations (37 ) (35 ) NA (35 ) NA Total Nielsen $ 1,938 $ 1,858 4.3 % $ 1,842 5.2 % Buy Segment Profitability Operating income was $331 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 as compared to $369 million for the year ended December 31, 2015.
The decrease was driven by the revenue performance discussed above, higher restructuring charges and an increase in depreciation and amortization expense.
Non-GAAP business segment income increased 1.6% on a constant currency basis.
50 Watch Segment Profitability Operating income was $935 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 as compared to $880 million for the year ended December 31, 2015.
The increase was driven by the revenue performance discussed above, partially offset by higher depreciation and amortization expense and restructuring charges.
Non-GAAP business segment income increased 7.0% on a constant currency basis.
Corporate Expenses and Eliminations Operating expenses were $123 million for the year ended December 31, 2016 as compared to $156 million for the year ended December 31, 2015 primarily due to decreases in other items outlined in the table above, partially offset by the increase in restructuring charges in 2016.
Liquidity and Capital Resources Cash flows from operations provided a source of funds of $1,310 million, $1,296 million and $1,209 million during the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
This increase was driven primarily by the Adjusted EBITDA performance discussed above and the $36 million cash contribution to Nielsen Foundation during the year ended December 31, 2016, partially offset by higher tax payments, and higher interest payments during the year ended December 31, 2017 related to higher debt balances and higher USD LIBOR senior secured term loan interest rates.
We provide for additional liquidity through several sources, including maintaining an adequate cash balance, access to global funding sources and a committed revolving credit facility.
The following table provides a summary of the major sources of liquidity for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015: (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Net cash from operating activities $ 1,310 $ 1,296 $ 1,209 Cash and short-term marketable securities $ 656 $ 754 $ 357 Revolving credit facility $ 575 $ 575 $ 575 Of the $656 million in cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2017, approximately $520 million was held in jurisdictions outside the U.S. We regularly review the amount of cash and cash equivalents held outside of the U.S. to determine the amounts necessary to fund the current operations of our foreign operations and their growth initiatives and amounts needed to service our U.S. indebtedness and related obligations.
The below table illustrates our weighted average interest rate and cash paid for interest over the last three years.
2017 2016 2015 Weighted average interest rate 4.32 % 4.04 % 4.04 % Cash paid for interest, net of amounts capitalized (in millions) $ 352 $ 319 $ 296 Our contractual obligations, commitments and debt service requirements over the next several years are significant.
We believe we will have available resources to meet both our short-term and long-term liquidity requirements, including our senior secured debt service.
We expect the cash flow from our operations, combined with existing cash and amounts available under the revolving credit facility, will provide sufficient liquidity to fund our current obligations, projected working capital requirements, restructuring obligations, dividend payments and capital spending over the next year.
In addition, we may, from time to time, purchase, repay, redeem or retire any of our outstanding debt securities (including any publicly issued debt securities) in privately negotiated or open market transactions, by tender offer or otherwise.
51 Long-term borrowings The following table provides a summary of our outstanding long-term borrowings as of December 31, 2017: (IN MILLIONS) WeightedInterestRate CarryingAmount $2,080 million Senior secured term loan (LIBOR based variable rate of 3.43%) due 2019 $ 1,392 $2,250 million Senior secured term loan (LIBOR based variable rate of 3.43%) due 2023 2,232 €380 million Senior secured term loan (Euro LIBOR based variable rate of 2.10%) due 2021 450 Total senior secured credit facilities (with weighted average interest rate) 3.39 % $ 4,074 $800 million 4.50% senior debenture loan due 2020 795 $625 million 5.50% senior debenture loan due 2021 620 $2,300 million 5.00% senior debenture loan due 2022 2,288 $500 million 5.00% senior debenture loan due 2025 496 Total debenture loans (with weighted average interest rate) 5.22 % $ 4,199 Other loans 1 Total long-term debt 4.32 % $ 8,274 Capital lease and other financing obligations 167 Total debt and other financing arrangements $ 8,441 Less: Current portion of long-term debt, capital lease and other financing obligations and other short-term borrowings 84 Non-current portion of long-term debt and capital lease and other financing obligations $ 8,357 Term Loan Facilities In October 2016, we entered into a second amendment to our Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, and as subsequently amended, the (“Existing Credit Agreement”).
The Existing Credit Agreement provides for term loan facilities as shown in the table above.
In April 2017, we entered into a third amendment to our Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (as amended prior to April 2017, the “Existing Credit Agreement,” and as amended in April 2017 by the third amendment, the “Amended Credit Agreement”), providing for a new class of Class B-4 Term Loans in an aggregate principal amount of $2.25 billion, the proceeds of which were used to replace or refinance the entire outstanding principal of existing Class B-3 Term Loans and a portion of existing Class A Term Loans.
The Class B-4 Term Loans will mature in full on October 4, 2023, and are required to be repaid in equal quarterly installments in an aggregate annual amount equal to 1.00% of the original principal amount of the Class B-4 Term Loans, with the balance payable on October 4, 2023.
The Class B-4 Term Loans bear interest equal to, at our election (i) a base rate or LIBOR rate, plus (ii) an applicable margin, which is equal to 2.00% (in the case of LIBOR loans) or 1.00% (in the case of base rate loans).
The Amended Credit Agreement contains the same affirmative and negative covenants as those of the Existing Credit Agreement.
Obligations under the Amended Credit Agreement are guaranteed by TNC B.V., substantially all of the wholly-owned U.S. subsidiaries of TNC B.V. and certain of the non-U.S. wholly-owned subsidiaries of TNC B.V., and are secured by substantially all of the existing and future property and assets of the U.S. subsidiaries of TNC B.V. and by a pledge of substantially all of the capital stock of the guarantors, the capital stock of substantially all of the U.S. subsidiaries of TNC B.V., and up to 65% of the capital stock of certain of the non-U.S. subsidiaries of TNC B.V.
Under a separate security agreement, substantially all of the assets of TNC B.V. are pledged as collateral for amounts outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement.
52 Covenants The Amended Credit Agreement contains a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict, subject to certain exceptions, the ability of Nielsen Holding and Finance B.V. and its restricted subsidiaries (which together constitute most of our subsidiaries) to incur additional indebtedness or guarantees, incur liens and engage in sale and leaseback transactions, make certain loans and investments, declare dividends, make payments or redeem or repurchase capital stock, engage in certain mergers, acquisitions and other business combinations, prepay, redeem or purchase certain indebtedness, amend or otherwise alter terms of certain indebtedness, sell certain assets, transact with affiliates, enter into agreements limiting subsidiary distributions and alter the business they conduct.
These entities are restricted, subject to certain exceptions, in their ability to transfer their net assets to us.
Such restricted net assets amounted to approximately $4.3 billion at December 31, 2017.
In addition, these entities are subject to a total leverage covenant.
The leverage ratio requires that we not permit the ratio of total net debt (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) at the end of any calendar quarter to Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) for the four quarters then ended to exceed a specified threshold.
The maximum permitted ratio is 5.50 to 1.00.
Neither we nor TNC B.V. is currently bound by any financial or negative covenants contained in the Amended Credit Agreement.
The Amended Credit Agreement also contains certain customary affirmative covenants and events of default.
Certain significant financial covenants are described further below.
Failure to comply with this financial covenant would result in an event of default under our Amended Credit Agreement unless waived by certain of our term lenders and our revolving lenders.
An event of default under our Amended Credit Agreement can result in the acceleration of our indebtedness under the facilities, which in turn would result in an event of default and possible acceleration of indebtedness under the agreements governing our debt securities as well.
As our failure to comply with the financial covenant described above can cause us to go into default under the agreements governing our indebtedness, management believes that our Amended Credit Agreement and this covenant are material to us.
As of December 31, 2017, we were in full compliance with the financial covenant described above.
Pursuant to our Amended Credit Agreement, we are subject to making mandatory prepayments on the term loans within our Amended Credit Agreement to the extent in any full calendar year we generate Excess Cash Flow (“ECF”), as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement.
The percentage of ECF that must be applied as a repayment is a function of several factors, including our ratio of total net debt to Covenant EBITDA, as well other adjustments, including any voluntary term loan repayments made in the course of the calendar year.
To the extent any mandatory repayment is required pursuant to this ECF clause; such payment must generally occur on or around the time of the delivery of the annual consolidated financial statements to the lenders.
At December 31, 2017, our ratio of total net debt to Covenant EBITDA was less than 5.00 to 1.00 and therefore no mandatory repayment was required.
Our next ECF measurement date will occur upon completion of the 2017 results, and although we do not expect to be required to issue any mandatory repayments in 2018 or beyond, it is uncertain at this time if any such payments will be required in future periods.
Revolving Credit Facility The Amended Credit Agreement also contains a senior secured revolving credit facility under which Nielsen Finance LLC, TNC (US) Holdings, Inc., and Nielsen Holding and Finance B.V. can borrow revolving loans.
The revolving credit facility can also be used for letters of credit, guarantees and swingline loans.
The existing revolving credit facility has commitments of $575 million with a final maturity of April 2019.
The senior secured revolving credit facility is provided under the Amended Credit Agreement and so contains covenants and restrictions as noted under the “Term loan facilities” section above.
Obligations under the revolving credit facility are guaranteed by the same entities that guarantee obligations under the Amended Credit Agreement and Senior Secured Loan Agreement.
As of December 31, 2017, we had zero borrowings outstanding and outstanding letters of credit of $13 million.
As of December 31, 2016, we had zero borrowings outstanding and outstanding letters of credit of $6 million.
As of December 31, 2017, we had $562 million available for borrowing under the revolving credit facility.
Debenture Loans The indentures governing certain of our debenture loans limit the majority of our subsidiaries’ ability to incur additional indebtedness, pay dividends or make other distributions or repurchase our capital stock, make certain investments, enter into certain types of transactions with affiliates, use assets as security in other transactions and sell certain assets or merge with or into other companies subject to certain exceptions.
Upon a change in control, we are required to make an offer to redeem all of the Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to the 101% of the aggregate accreted principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The Senior Notes are jointly and severally guaranteed by Nielsen Holdings plc, substantially all of the wholly owned U.S. subsidiaries of Nielsen Holdings plc, and certain of the non-U.S. wholly-owned subsidiaries of Nielsen Holdings plc.
53 In January 2017, we issued $500 million aggregate principal amount of 5.0% Senior Notes due 2025 at par, with cash proceeds of approximately $495 million, net of fees and expenses.
Dividends and Share Repurchase Program We remain committed to driving shareholder value as evidenced in 2013 with the adoption of a quarterly cash dividend policy by our Board of Directors, under which we have paid $474 million and $434 million in cash dividends during the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
Any decision to declare and pay dividends in the future will be made at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will be subject to the Board’s continuing determination that the dividend policy and the declaration of dividends thereunder are in the best interests of our shareholders, and are in compliance with all laws and agreements to which we are subject.
The below table summarizes the dividends declared on our common stock during 2016 and 2017.
Declaration Date Record Date Payment Date Dividend Per Share February 18, 2016 March 3, 2016 March 17, 2016 $ 0.28 April 19, 2016 June 2, 2016 June 16, 2016 $ 0.31 July 21, 2016 August 25, 2016 September 8, 2016 $ 0.31 October 20, 2016 November 22, 2016 December 6, 2016 $ 0.31 February 16, 2017 March 2, 2017 March 16, 2017 $ 0.31 April 24, 2017 June 2, 2017 June 16, 2017 $ 0.34 July 20, 2017 August 24, 2017 September 7, 2017 $ 0.34 October 19, 2017 November 21, 2017 December 5, 2017 $ 0.34 Our Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program, as included in the below table, for up to $2 billion of our outstanding common stock.
The primary purposes of the program are to return value to shareholders and to mitigate dilution associated with our equity compensation plans.
Board Approval Share Repurchase Authorization ($ in millions) July 25, 2013 $ 500 October 23, 2014 1,000 December 11, 2015 500 Total Share Repurchase Authorization $ 2,000 Repurchases under these plans will be made in accordance with applicable securities laws from time to time in the open market or otherwise depending on our evaluation of market conditions and other factors.
This program has been executed within the limitations of the authority granted by our shareholders.
As of December 31, 2017, there have been 37,206,365 shares of our common stock purchased at an average price of $45.74 per share (total consideration of approximately $1,702 million) under this program.
54 The following table provides a summary of share repurchase program activity through December 31, 2017.
Period Total Number of Shares Purchased Average Price Paid per Share Total Number of Shares Purchased as Part of Publicly Announced Plans or Programs Dollar Value of Shares that may yet be Purchased under the Plans or Programs As of December 31, 2016 33,837,526 $ 46.16 33,837,526 $ 437,970,016 2017 Activity January 1- 31 — — — $ 437,970,016 February 1- 28 564,623 $ 45.30 564,623 $ 412,392,848 March 1- 31 365,228 $ 45.15 365,228 $ 395,903,537 April 1-30 — — — $ 395,903,537 May 1-31 1,020,212 $ 40.65 1,020,212 $ 354,426,944 June 1-30 — — — $ 354,426,944 July 1-31 — — — $ 354,426,944 August 1-31 698,062 $ 41.77 698,062 $ 325,268,111 September 1-30 102,461 $ 39.25 102,461 $ 321,246,116 October 1-31 — — — $ 321,246,116 November 1-30 221,845 $ 36.26 326,679 $ 313,201,667 December 1-31 396,408 $ 38.05 396,408 $ 298,118,746 Total 37,206,365 $ 45.74 37,206,365 Cash Flows 2017 versus 2016 Operating activities.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,310 million for the year ended December 31, 2017, compared to $1,296 million for the year ended December 31, 2016.
This increase was driven primarily by the Adjusted EBITDA performance discussed above and the $36 million cash contribution to the Nielsen Foundation during the year ended December 31, 2016, partially offset by higher tax payments, and higher interest payments during the year ended December 31, 2017 related to higher debt balances and higher USD LIBOR senior secured term loan interest rates.
Our key collections performance measure, days billing outstanding (DBO), stayed consistent for the year ended December 31, 2017, as compared to a 3 day decrease for the year ended December 31, 2016.
Investing activities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $1,236 million for the year ended December 31, 2017, compared to $642 million for the year ended December 31, 2016.
The increase was primarily driven by increased acquisition payments and capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2017, as compared to 2016. Financing activities.
Net cash used in financing activities was $215 million for the year ended December 31, 2017, compared to $248 million for the year ended December 31, 2016.
The decrease in cash used in financing activities is primarily due to lower share repurchasing, as described in the “Dividends and Share Repurchase Program” section above, partially offset by decreased net proceeds from the issuance and repayment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2017, higher dividend payments, as described in the “Dividends and Share Repurchase Program” section above, and an increase in capital lease financing during the year ended December 31, 2017, as compared to the same period of 2016.
Cash Flows 2016 versus 2015 Operating activities.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,296 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, compared to $1,209 million for the year ended December 31, 2015.
This increase was driven primarily by the Adjusted EBITDA performance discussed above and our focus on working capital management, partially offset by our $36 million cash contribution to the Nielsen Foundation during the year ended December 31, 2016 and higher interest payments during the year ended December 31, 2016 related to higher debt balances and higher USD LIBOR senior secured term loan interest rates.
Our key collections performance measure, days billing outstanding (DBO), decreased by 3 days for the year ended December 31, 2016, as compared to a 1 day increase for the year ended December 31, 2015.
Investing activities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $642 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, compared to $581 million for the year ended December 31, 2015.
The increase was primarily driven by increased acquisition payments and capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2016, as compared to 2015.
55 Financing activities.
Net cash used in financing activities was $248 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, compared to $492 million for the year ended December 31, 2015.
The decrease in cash used in financing activities is primarily due to lower share repurchasing, as described in the “Dividends and Share Repurchase Program” section above, and increased net proceeds from the issuance and repayment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2016, as compared to the same period of 2015, partially offset by higher dividend payments, as described in the “Dividends and Share Repurchase Program” section above, and an increase in capital lease financing during the year ended December 31, 2016, as compared to the same period of 2015.
Capital Expenditures Investments in property, plant, equipment, software and other assets totaled $489 million, $433 million and $408 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
In addition, the Company received $42 million of proceeds from the sale of certain property, plant and equipment and other assets during each of the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
Commitments and Contingencies Outsourced Services Agreements In October 2017, we amended and restated in its entirety, our Amended and Restated Master Services Agreement, dated as of October 1, 2007, with Tata America International Corporation and Tata Consultancy Services Limited (jointly, “TCS”) (as amended prior to the Second Amendment and Restatement, the “Prior Agreement”) by entering into a Second Amended and Restated Master Services Agreement (the “Agreement”), dated as of October 1, 2017 and effective as of January 1, 2017 (the “Effective Date”), with TCS.
The term of the Agreement has been extended for an additional five years, so as to expire on December 31, 2025, with three one-year renewal options granted to us.
We have committed to purchase services from TCS from the Effective Date through the remaining term of the Agreement (the “Minimum Commitment”) in the amount of $2.25 billion, including a commitment to purchase at least $320 million in services per year from 2017 through 2020, $186 million in services per year from 2021 through 2024, and $139.5 million in services in 2025 (in each of the foregoing cases, the “Annual Commitment”).
We met the Minimum Commitment in 2017.
In connection with the entry into the Agreement, the parties have agreed to terminate the separate Global Infrastructure Services Agreement between them as of the Effective Date and include the services provided thereunder in one or more Statements of Work (“SOWs”) arising under the Agreement.
TCS’s charges under such SOWs will continue to be credited against the Minimum Commitment and the Annual Commitment.
TCS globally provides us with professional services relating to information technology (including application development and maintenance), business process outsourcing, client service knowledge process outsourcing, management sciences, analytics, and financial planning.
As we order specific services under the Agreement, the parties will execute SOWs describing the specific scope of the services to be performed by TCS.
The amount of the Minimum Commitment and the Annual Commitment may be reduced on the occurrence of certain events, some of which also provide us with the right to terminate the Agreement or SOWs, as applicable.
Nielsen Foundation, Inc.
In November 2015, we established the Nielsen Foundation, Inc. (the “Foundation”) for charitable, educational, scientific, and literary purposes including the making of distributions to organizations that qualify as tax exempt organizations under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
The assets and transactions of the Foundation are not included in our consolidated financial statements.
Donations to the Foundation are expensed when committed by us.
In December 2015, our Board of Directors approved an unconditional donation of $36 million to the Foundation, at which time it was recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of operations.
In March 2016, we paid the cash contribution to the Foundation.
Other Contractual Obligations Our other contractual obligations include capital lease obligations (including interest portion), facility leases, leases of certain computer and other equipment, agreements to purchase data and telecommunication services, the payment of principal and interest on debt and pension fund obligations.
56 At December 31, 2017, the minimum annual payments under these agreements and other contracts that had initial or remaining non-cancelable terms in excess of one year are as listed in the following table.
Due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of future cash flows associated with our unrecognized tax positions at December 31, 2017, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the timing of any potential cash settlements with the respective taxing authorities.
Therefore, $505 million in uncertain tax positions (which includes interest and penalties of $53 million) have been excluded from the contractual obligations table below.
See Note 13 – “Income Taxes” – to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion on income taxes.
Payments due by period (IN MILLIONS) Total 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Thereafter Capital lease obligations(a) $ 196 $ 58 $ 49 $ 35 $ 21 $ 13 $ 20 Operating leases(b) 453 99 79 62 46 35 132 Other contractual obligations(c) 2,490 589 472 440 206 201 582 Long-term debt, including current portion(a) 8,274 28 1,400 818 1,078 2,326 2,624 Interest(d) 1,495 355 315 298 253 157 117 Pension fund obligations(e) 27 27 — — — — — Total $ 12,935 $ 1,156 $ 2,315 $ 1,653 $ 1,604 $ 2,732 $ 3,475 (a) Our short-term and long-term debt obligations, including capital lease and other financing obligations, are described in Note 10 – “Long-Term Debt and Other Financing Arrangements” – to our consolidated financial statements.
(b) Our operating lease obligations are described in Note 15 – “Commitments and Contingencies” – to our consolidated financial statements.
(c) Other contractual obligations represent obligations under agreements, which are not unilaterally cancelable by us, are legally enforceable and specify fixed or minimum amounts or quantities of goods or services at fixed or minimum prices.
We generally require purchase orders for vendor and third party spending.
The amounts presented above represent the minimum future annual services covered by purchase obligations including data processing, building maintenance, equipment purchasing, photocopiers, land and mobile telephone service, computer software and hardware maintenance, and outsourcing.
Our remaining commitments as of December 31, 2017, under the outsourced services agreement with TCS have been included above based on the Annual Commitment minimum required payments.
(d) Interest payments consist of interest on both fixed-rate and variable-rate debt based on LIBOR as of December 31, 2017.
(e) Our contributions to pension and other post-retirement defined benefit plans were $21 million, $21 million and $25 million during 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Future minimum pension and other post-retirement benefits contributions are not determinable for time periods after 2018.
See Note 9 – “Pensions and Other Post-Retirement Benefits” – to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion on plan obligations.
Guarantees and Other Contingent Commitments At December 31, 2017, we were committed under the following significant guarantee arrangements: Sub-lease guarantees.
We provide sub-lease guarantees in accordance with certain agreements pursuant to which we guarantee
 all rental payments upon default of rental payment by the sub-lessee.
To date, we have not been required to perform under such arrangements, and do not anticipate making any significant payments related to such guarantees and, accordingly, no amounts have been recorded.
Letters of credit.
Letters of credit issued and outstanding amount to $13 million at December 31, 2017.
Legal Proceedings and Contingencies We are subject to litigation and other claims in the ordinary course of business, some of which include claims for substantial sums.
Accruals have been recorded when the outcome is probable and can be reasonably estimated.
While the ultimate results of claims and litigation cannot be determined, we expect that the ultimate disposition of these matters will not have a material adverse effect on our operations or financial condition.
However, depending on the amount and the timing, an unfavorable resolution of some or all of these matters could materially affect our future results of operations or cash flows in a particular period.
57 Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements Except as disclosed above, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements that currently have or are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our consolidated financial condition, changes in financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditure or capital resources.
Summary of Recent Accounting Pronouncements Revenue Recognition In May 2014, the FASB issued an Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”), “Revenue from Contracts with Customers.” The new revenue recognition standard provides a five step analysis of transactions to determine when and how revenue is recognized.
The new model will require revenue recognition to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration a company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services and shall be applied retrospectively to each period presented or as a cumulative-effect adjustment as of the date of adoption if using the modified retrospective transition method.
In addition, the new standard requires disclosure of the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers.
This standard is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2017.
In 2014, we established a cross-functional implementation team consisting of representatives from across all of its business segments.
Management utilized a bottoms-up approach to analyze the impact of the standard on our contract portfolio by reviewing the current accounting policies and practices to identify potential differences that would result from applying the requirements of the new standard to our revenue contracts.
In addition, management identified, and are in the process of implementing appropriate changes to our business processes, systems and controls to support the recognition and disclosure under the new standard.
Based on management’s assessment, we believe the most significant impact the adoption of the new standard will have on our consolidated financial statements are the required financial statement disclosures.
Except for the required financial statement disclosures, we do not believe the adoption of the ASU will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements and will adopt the ASU using the modified retrospective transition method.
Leases In February 2016, the FASB issued an ASU, “Leases”.
The new standard amends the recognition of lease assets and lease liabilities by lessees for those leases currently classified as operating leases and amends disclosure requirements associated with leasing arrangements.
The new standard increases assets and liabilities on the balance sheet.
The new standard is effective for fiscal years and interim periods within those fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018.
Early adoption is permitted.
The new standard must be adopted using a modified retrospective transition, and provides for certain practical expedients.
Transition will require application of the new guidance at the beginning of the earliest comparative period presented.
We are currently assessing the impact the adoption of this ASU will have on our consolidated financial statements.
Financial Instruments – Credit Losses In June 2016, the FASB issued an ASU, “Financial Instruments – Credit Losses (Topic 326), Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments.” The standard significantly changes how entities will measure credit losses for most financial assets and certain other instruments that are not measured at fair value through net income.
The standard will replace today’s “incurred loss” approach with an “expected loss” model for instruments measured at amortized cost.
For available-for-sale debt securities, entities will be required to record allowances rather than reduce the carrying amount, as they do today under the other-than-temporary impairment model.
It also simplifies the accounting model for purchased credit-impaired debt securities and loans.
The new standard is effective for fiscal years and interim periods within those fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019.
Early adoption is permitted for fiscal years and interim periods within those fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018.
We are currently assessing the impact the adoption of this ASU will have on our consolidated financial statements.
Intangibles- Goodwill and Other In January 2017, the FASB issued an ASU, “Intangibles—Goodwill and Other” to simplify the subsequent measurement of goodwill.
The update requires only a single-step quantitative test to identify and measure impairment based on the excess of a reporting unit's carrying amount over its fair value.
A qualitative assessment may still be completed first for an entity to determine if a quantitative impairment test is necessary.
The update is effective for fiscal year 2021 and is to be adopted on a prospective basis.
Early adoption is permitted for interim or annual goodwill impairment tests performed on testing dates after January 1, 2017.
We elected to early adopt this ASU effective January 1, 2017.
There was no impact on our consolidated financial statements.
58 Other Income—Gains and Losses from the Derecognition of Nonfinancial Assets In February 2017, the FASB issued an ASU, “Other Income—Gains and Losses from the Derecognition of Nonfinancial Assets,” which clarifies the scope and application of ASC 610-20 on the sale or transfer of nonfinancial assets and in substance nonfinancial assets to noncustomers, including partial sales.
It requires the application of certain recognition and measurement principles in ASC 606 when derecognizing nonfinancial assets and in substance nonfinancial assets, and the counterparty is not a customer.
This ASU is effective for fiscal years (and interim reporting periods within those years) beginning after December 15, 2017.
We are currently assessing the impact the adoption of this ASU will have on our consolidated financial statements.
Retirement Benefits: Improving the Presentation of Net Periodic Pension Cost and Net Periodic Postretirement Benefit Cost In March 2017, the FASB issued an ASU, Compensation — Retirement Benefits: Improving the Presentation of Net Periodic Pension Cost and Net Periodic Postretirement Benefit Cost, which will change the presentation of net periodic benefit cost related to employer sponsored defined benefit plans and other postretirement benefits.
Service cost will be included within the same income statement line item as other compensation costs arising from services rendered during the period, while other components of net periodic benefit pension cost will be presented separately outside of operating income.
Additionally, only service costs may be capitalized in assets.
This ASU is effective for fiscal years (and interim reporting periods within those years) beginning after December 15, 2017.
We are currently assessing the impact the adoption of this ASU will have on our consolidated financial statements.
Compensation- Stock Compensation In May 2017, the FASB issued an ASU, Compensation- Stock Compensation (Topic 718), “Scope of Modification Accounting”, which amends the scope of modification accounting for share-based payment arrangements.
The standard provides guidance on the types of changes to the terms or conditions of share-based payment awards to which an entity would be required to apply modification accounting under ASC 718.
Specifically, an entity would not apply modification accounting if the fair value, vesting conditions, and classification of the awards are the same immediately before and after the modification.
The new standard is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2017 and interim periods within those years.
Early adoption is permitted.
We do not expect the adoption of this ASU to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Derivatives and Hedging In August 2017, the FASB issued an ASU “Derivatives and Hedging- Targeted Improvements to Accounting for Hedging Activities” (“ASU 2017-12”).
The amendments expand an entity’s ability to apply hedge accounting for nonfinancial and financial risk components and allow for a simplified approach for fair value hedging of interest rate risk.
ASU 2017-12 eliminates the need to separately measure and report hedge ineffectiveness and generally requires the entire change in fair value of a hedging instrument to be presented in the same income statement line as the hedged item.
Additionally, the standard simplifies the hedge documentation and effectiveness assessment requirements under the previous guidance.
The amendments of this ASU are effective for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, with early adoption permitted.
We elected to early adopt this ASU during the third quarter of 2017.
See footnote 7 “Fair Value Measurement,” for the additional disclosures related to this ASU.
The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Market risk is the potential loss arising from adverse changes in market rates and market prices such as interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates, and changes in the market value of equity instruments.
We are exposed to market risk, primarily related to foreign exchange and interest rates.
We actively monitor these exposures.
Historically, in order to manage the volatility relating to these exposures, we entered into a variety of derivative financial instruments, mainly interest rate swaps, cross-currency swaps and forward rate agreements.
Currently we only employ basic contracts, that is, without options, embedded or otherwise.
Our objective is to reduce, where it is deemed appropriate to do so, fluctuations in earnings, cash flows and the value of our net investments in subsidiaries resulting from changes in interest rates and foreign currency rates.
It is our policy not to trade in financial instruments.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk We operate globally and we predominantly generate revenues and expenses in local currencies.
Because of fluctuations (including possible devaluations) in currency exchange rates or the imposition of limitations on conversion of foreign currencies into our reporting currency, we are subject to currency translation exposure on the profits of our operations, in addition to transaction exposure.
59 For the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, we recorded a net gain of zero and $1 million, respectively, associated with foreign currency derivative financial instruments within foreign currency exchange transactions losses, net in our consolidated statements of operations.
As of December 31, 2017 and 2016, the notional amounts of outstanding foreign currency derivative financial instruments were $74 million and $77 million, respectively.
The table below details the percentage of revenues and expenses by currency for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2015: U.S.
Dollars Euro Other Currencies Year ended December 31, 2017 Revenues 59 % 10 % 31 % Operating costs 56 % 11 % 33 % Year ended December 31, 2016 Revenues 61 % 9 % 30 % Operating costs 57 % 10 % 33 % Based on the year ended December 31, 2017, a one cent change in the U.S. dollar/Euro exchange rate would have impacted revenues by approximately $6 million annually, with an immaterial impact on operating income.
Interest Rate Risk We continually review our fixed and variable rate debt along with related hedging opportunities in order to ensure our portfolio is appropriately balanced as part of our overall interest rate risk management strategy and through this process we consider both short-term and long-term considerations in the U.S. and global financial markets in making adjustments to our tolerable exposures to interest rate risk.
At December 31, 2017, we had $4,074 million of floating-rate debt under our senior secured credit facilities, of which $2,050 million was subject to effective floating-fixed interest rate swaps.
A one percent increase in interest rates applied to our floating rate indebtedness would therefore increase annual interest expense by approximately $20 million ($41 million without giving effect to any of our interest rate swaps).
In August 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a four-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of October 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.60%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In July 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of October 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.66%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In April 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of July 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.63%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In March 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a five-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of July 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 2.00%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In February 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of July 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.73%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In June 2016, we entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of June 9, 2016.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of our variable-rate debt at an average rate of 0.86%.
This derivative instrument has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
60 In July 2015, we entered into a $150 million in notional amount of three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date in July 2016.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of the interest rates of a corresponding amount of our variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.62%.
This derivative instrument has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In April 2015, we entered into a $150 million in notional amount of three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date in April 2016.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of the interest rates of a corresponding amount of our variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.40%.
This derivative instrument has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In November 2014, we entered into a $250 million in notional amount of two-year forward interest swap agreement with a starting date in May 2016.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of the interest rate of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.78%.
This derivative instrument has been designated as interest rate cash flow hedge.
Derivative instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of non-performance, or credit risk.
We do not believe that we currently face a significant risk of loss in the event of non-performance by the counterparties associated with these instruments, as these transactions were executed with a diversified group of major financial institutions with a minimum investment-grade or better credit rating.
Our credit risk exposure is managed through the continuous monitoring of our exposures to such counterparties.
61 Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Nielsen Holdings plc Index to Consolidated Financial Statements Management’s Annual Report on Internal Controls Over Financial Reporting 63 Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 64 Consolidated Statements of Operations 66 Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income/(Loss) 67 Consolidated Balance Sheets 68 Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 69 Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity 70 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 73 Schedule I – Consolidated Financial Information of Registrant 122 Schedule II – Valuation and Qualifying Accounts 125 62 Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting for the Company as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) or 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
Our internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Management has performed an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017, based on the framework and criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework).
Based on this evaluation, management has concluded that our internal controls over financial reporting were effective as of December 31, 2017.
Ernst & Young LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, has provided an attestation report on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
The Company’s financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K also have been audited by Ernst & Young LLP.
Their reports follow.
/s/ Dwight M. Barns /s/ Jamere Jackson Dwight M. Barns Jamere Jackson Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer February 8, 2018 63 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Nielsen Holdings plc Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting We have audited Nielsen Holdings plc’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017, based on the criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) (the COSO criteria).
In our opinion, Nielsen Holdings plc (“the Company”) maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017, based on the COSO criteria.
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated balance sheets of the Company as of December 31, 2017 and 2016, and the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income/(loss), changes in equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2017 of the Company and our report dated February 8, 2018, expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Basis for Opinion The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting included in the accompanying Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances.
We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP New York, New York February 8, 2018 64 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Nielsen Holdings plc Opinion on the Financial Statements We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Nielsen Holdings plc (“the Company”) as of December 31, 2017 and 2016, and the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income/(loss), changes in equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2017, and the related notes and the financial statement schedules listed in the Index at Item 8 (collectively referred to as the “financial statements”).
In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position of the Company at December 31, 2017 and 2016, and the consolidated results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2017, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017, based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report dated February 8, 2018 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Basis for Opinion These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audits.
We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks.
Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements.
Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2006.
New York, New York February 8, 2018 65 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statements of Operations Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS EXCEPT SHARE AND PER SHARE DATA) 2017 2016 2015 Revenues $ 6,572 $ 6,309 $ 6,172 Cost of revenues, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 2,765 2,607 2,539 Selling, general and administrative expenses, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 1,862 1,851 1,915 Depreciation and amortization 640 603 574 Restructuring charges 80 105 51 Operating income 1,225 1,143 1,093 Interest income 4 4 4 Interest expense (374 ) (333 ) (311 ) Foreign currency exchange transaction losses, net (10 ) (6 ) (31 ) Other (expense)/income, net (17 ) 8 206 Income before income taxes and equity in net loss of affiliates 828 816 961 Provision for income taxes (388 ) (309 ) (383 ) Equity in net loss of affiliates — — (3 ) Net income 440 507 575 Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests 11 5 5 Net income attributable to Nielsen stockholders $ 429 $ 502 $ 570 Net income per share of common stock, basic Net income attributable to Nielsen stockholders $ 1.20 $ 1.40 $ 1.55 Net income per share of common stock, diluted Net income attributable to Nielsen stockholders $ 1.20 $ 1.39 $ 1.54 Weighted-average shares of common stock outstanding, basic 356,714,940 358,830,080 366,996,788 Dilutive shares of common stock 1,337,493 3,337,049 3,961,016 Weighted-average shares of common stock outstanding, diluted 358,052,433 362,167,129 370,957,804 Dividends declared per common share $ 1.33 $ 1.21 $ 1.09 The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
66 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income/(Loss) Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Net income $ 440 $ 507 $ 575 Other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax Foreign currency translation adjustments (1) 248 (94 ) (357 ) Available for sale securities (2) — — (19 ) Changes in the fair value of cash flow hedges (3) 11 2 (1 ) Defined benefit pension plan adjustments (4) 14 (65 ) 87 Total other comprehensive income/(loss) 273 (157 ) (290 ) Total comprehensive income 713 350 285 Less: comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests 13 — (3 ) Total comprehensive income attributable to Nielsen stockholders $ 700 $ 350 $ 288 (1) Net of tax of $23 million, $(9) million and $(15) million for the year ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 respectively.
(2) Net of tax of zero, zero and $13 million for the year ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 respectively.
(3) Net of tax of $(7) million, $(2) million and $1 million for the year ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 respectively.
(4) Net of tax of $(2) million, $20 million and $(10) million for the year ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 respectively.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements 67 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Balance Sheets December 31, (IN MILLIONS, EXCEPT SHARE AND PER SHARE DATA) 2017 2016 Assets: Current assets Cash and cash equivalents $ 656 $ 754 Trade and other receivables, net of allowances for doubtful accounts and sales returns of $29 and $25 as of December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively 1,280 1,171 Prepaid expenses and other current assets 346 297 Total current assets 2,282 2,222 Non-current assets Property, plant and equipment, net 482 471 Goodwill 8,495 7,845 Other intangible assets, net 5,077 4,736 Deferred tax assets 170 127 Other non-current assets 360 329 Total assets $ 16,866 $ 15,730 Liabilities and equity: Current liabilities Accounts payable and other current liabilities $ 1,141 $ 1,012 Deferred revenues 361 297 Income tax liabilities 111 97 Current portion of long-term debt, capital lease obligations and short-term borrowings 84 188 Total current liabilities 1,697 1,594 Non-current liabilities Long-term debt and capital lease obligations 8,357 7,738 Deferred tax liabilities 1,435 1,175 Other non-current liabilities 934 930 Total liabilities 12,423 11,437 Commitments and contingencies (Note 15) Equity: Nielsen stockholders’ equity Common stock, €0.07 par value, 1,185,800,000 and 1,185,800,000 shares authorized; 355,956,031 and 357,745,953 shares issued and 355,944,976 and 357,465,614 shares outstanding at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively 32 32 Additional paid-in capital 4,742 4,825 Retained earnings 411 456 Accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of income taxes (940 ) (1,211 ) Total Nielsen stockholders’ equity 4,245 4,102 Noncontrolling interests 198 191 Total equity 4,443 4,293 Total liabilities and equity $ 16,866 $ 15,730 The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
68 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Operating Activities Net income $ 440 $ 507 $ 575 Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities: Stock-based compensation expense 45 51 48 Deferred income tax 162 88 213 Currency exchange rate differences on financial transactions and other gains (10 ) (19 ) (167 ) Equity in net income of affiliates, net of dividends received 2 2 4 Depreciation and amortization 640 603 574 Changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of effect of businesses acquired and divested: Trade and other receivables, net 10 53 (35 ) Prepaid expenses and other assets (28 ) 4 (63 ) Accounts payable and other current liabilities and deferred revenues 31 (63 ) 36 Other non-current liabilities 2 (8 ) (2 ) Interest payable 22 14 15 Income taxes (6 ) 64 11 Net cash provided by operating activities 1,310 1,296 1,209 Investing Activities Acquisition of subsidiaries and affiliates, net of cash acquired (778 ) (285 ) (246 ) Proceeds from the sale of subsidiaries and affiliates, net 2 34 30 Additions to property, plant and equipment and other assets (119 ) (109 ) (134 ) Additions to intangible assets (370 ) (324 ) (274 ) Proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment and other assets 42 42 7 Other investing activities (13 ) — 36 Net cash used in investing activities (1,236 ) (642 ) (581 ) Financing Activities Net payments under revolving credit facility — (164 ) (116 ) Proceeds from issuances of debt, net of issuance costs 2,745 2,502 746 Repayment of debt (2,296 ) (1,765 ) (98 ) (Decrease)/increase in other short-term borrowings (5 ) 4 — Cash dividends paid to stockholders (474 ) (434 ) (408 ) Repurchase of common stock (140 ) (418 ) (667 ) Proceeds from issuance of common stock 21 81 72 Proceeds from employee stock purchase plan 6 1 — Capital leases (55 ) (40 ) (22 ) Other financing activities (17 ) (15 ) 1 Net cash used in financing activities (215 ) (248 ) (492 ) Effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 43 (9 ) (52 ) Net (decrease)/increase in cash and cash equivalents (98 ) 397 84 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 754 357 273 Cash and cash equivalents at end of period $ 656 $ 754 $ 357 Supplemental Cash Flow Information Cash paid for income taxes $ (232 ) $ (157 ) $ (159 ) Cash paid for interest, net of amounts capitalized $ (352 ) $ (319 ) $ (296 ) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
69 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss), Net Retained Total Additional Earnings Currency Available Cash Post Nielsen Common Treasury Paid-in (Accumulated Translation for Sale Flow Employment Stockholders’ Noncontrolling Total (IN MILLIONS) Stock Stock Capital Deficit) Adjustments Securities Hedges Benefits Equity Interests Equity Balance, December 31, 2014 $ 32 $ (415 ) $ 6,344 $ (128 ) $ (418 ) $ 19 $ (2 ) $ (376 ) $ 5,056 $ 77 $ 5,133 Net income — — — 570 — — — — 570 5 575 Currency translation adjustments, net of tax of $(15) — — — — (349 ) — — — (349 ) (8 ) (357 ) Unrealized loss on pension liability, net of tax of $(10) — — — — — — — 87 87 — 87 Realized gain on available for sale securities, net of tax of $13 — — — — — (19 ) — — (19 ) — (19 ) Cash flow hedges, net of tax of $1 — — — — — — (1 ) — (1 ) — (1 ) Capital contribution by non-controlling partner — — — — — — — — — 3 3 (Divestiture)/acquisition of an interest in a consolidated subsidiary — — (1 ) — — — — — (1 ) 117 116 Dividends to stockholders — — (297 ) (101 ) — — — — (398 ) — (398 ) Shares of common stock issued in business combinations — — 2 — — — — — 2 — 2 Common stock issued under stock-based compensation plans — 78 (3 ) — — — — — 75 — 75 Excess tax benefit from stock based compensation — 30 — — — — — 30 — 30 Repurchase of common stock — (467 ) (200 ) — — — — — (667 ) — (667 ) Equity conversion 804 (804 ) — — — — — — — — Stock-based compensation expense — — 48 — — — — — 48 — 48 Balance, December 31, 2015 $ 32 $ — $ 5,119 $ 341 $ (767 ) $ — $ (3 ) $ (289 ) $ 4,433 $ 194 $ 4,627 70 Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss), Net Total Additional Currency Cash Post Nielsen Common Paid-in Retained Translation Flow Employment Stockholders’ Noncontrolling Total (IN MILLIONS) Stock Capital Earnings Adjustments Hedges Benefits Equity Interests Equity Balance, December 31, 2015 $ 32 $ 5,119 $ 341 $ (767 ) $ (3 ) $ (289 ) $ 4,433 $ 194 $ 4,627 Adoption of stock-based compensation standard — — 47 — — — 47 — 47 Balance, January 1, 2016 32 5,119 388 (767 ) (3 ) (289 ) 4,480 194 4,674 Net income — — 502 — — — 502 5 507 Currency translation adjustments, net of tax of $(9) — — — (89 ) — — (89 ) (5 ) (94 ) Cash flow hedges, net of tax of $(2) — — — — 2 — 2 — 2 Unrealized loss on pension liability, net of tax of $20 — — — — — (65 ) (65 ) — (65 ) Capital contribution by non-controlling partner — — — — — — — 7 7 Acquisition/Divestiture of an interest in a consolidated subsidiary — (5 ) — — — — (5 ) — (5 ) Dividends to stockholders — — (434 ) — — — (434 ) — (434 ) Dividends to non-controlling interest — — — — — — — (10 ) (10 ) Common stock issued under stock-based compensation plans — 78 — — — — 78 — 78 Repurchase of common stock — (418 ) — — — — (418 ) — (418 ) Stock-based compensation expense — 51 — — — — 51 — 51 Balance, December 31, 2016 $ 32 $ 4,825 $ 456 $ (856 ) $ (1 ) $ (354 ) $ 4,102 $ 191 $ 4,293 71 Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss), Net Total Additional Currency Cash Post Nielsen Common Paid-in Retained Translation Flow Employment Stockholders’ Noncontrolling Total (IN MILLIONS) Stock Capital Earnings Adjustments Hedges Benefits Equity Interests Equity Balance, December 31, 2016 $ 32 $ 4,825 $ 456 $ (856 ) $ (1 ) $ (354 ) $ 4,102 $ 191 $ 4,293 Net income — — 429 — — — 429 11 440 Currency translation adjustments, net of tax of $23 — — — 246 — — 246 2 248 Cash flow hedges, net of tax of $(7) — — — — 11 — 11 — 11 Unrealized loss on pension liability, net of tax of $(2) — — — — — 14 14 — 14 Capital contribution by a non-controlling partner — — — — — — — 6 6 Acquisition of an interest in a consolidated subsidiary — (12 ) — — — — (12 ) — (12 ) Employee stock purchase plan — 6 — — — — 6 — 6 Dividends to stockholders — — (474 ) — — — (474 ) (12 ) (486 ) Common stock issued under stock-based compensation plans — 21 — — — — 21 — 21 Repurchase of common stock — (140 ) — — — — (140 ) — (140 ) Stock-based compensation expense — 42 — — — — 42 — 42 Balance, December 31, 2017 $ 32 $ 4,742 $ 411 $ (610 ) $ 10 $ (340 ) $ 4,245 $ 198 $ 4,443 The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
72 Nielsen Holding plc Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 1.
Description of Business, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies Nielsen, together with its subsidiaries, is a leading global information and measurement company that provides clients with a comprehensive understanding of consumers and consumer behavior.
Nielsen is aligned into two reportable segments: what consumers buy (“Buy”), what consumers watch and listen to (“Watch”).
Nielsen has a presence in more than 100 countries, with its headquarters located in Oxford, the United Kingdom and New York, USA.
See Note 16 – “Segments” for a discussion of the Company’s reportable segments.
On August 31, 2015, Nielsen N.V., a Dutch public company listed on the New York Stock Exchange, merged with Nielsen Holdings plc, by way of a cross-border merger under the European Cross-Border Merger Directive, with Nielsen Holdings plc being the surviving company (the “Merger”).
The Merger effectively changed the place of incorporation of Nielsen’s publically traded parent holding company from the Netherlands to England and Wales, with no changes made to the business being conducted by Nielsen prior to the Merger.
Due to the fact that the Merger was a business combination between entities under common control, the exchange of assets and liabilities were made at carrying value.
Therefore, there were no direct accounting implications in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Nielsen, together with its subsidiaries, is a leading global information and measurement company that provides clients with a comprehensive understanding of consumers and consumer behavior.
Nielsen is aligned into two reportable segments: what consumers buy (“Buy”), what consumers watch and listen to (“Watch”).
Nielsen has a presence in more than 100 countries, with its headquarters located in Oxford, the United Kingdom and New York, USA.
See Note 16 – “Segments” for a discussion of the Company’s reportable segments.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements are presented in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”).
All amounts are presented in U.S.
Dollars (“$”), except for share and per share data or where expressly stated as being in other currencies, e.g., Euros (“€”).
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Nielsen and all subsidiaries and other controlled entities.
The Company has evaluated events occurring subsequent to December 31, 2017 for potential recognition or disclosure in the consolidated financial statements and concluded there were no subsequent events that required recognition or disclosure other than those provided.
Consolidation The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Nielsen and all subsidiaries and other controlled entities.
Noncontrolling interests in subsidiaries are reported as a component of equity in the consolidated financial statements with disclosure on the face of the consolidated statements of operations of the amounts of consolidated net income attributable to Nielsen stockholders and to the noncontrolling interests.
The equity method of accounting is used for investments in affiliates and joint ventures where Nielsen has significant influence but not control, usually supported by a shareholding of between 20% and 50% of the voting rights.
Investments in which Nielsen owns less than 20% and does not have significant influence are accounted for either as available-for-sale securities if the shares are publicly traded or as cost method investments.
Intercompany accounts and transactions between consolidated companies have been eliminated in consolidation.
Foreign Currency Translation Nielsen has significant investments outside the United States, primarily in the Euro-zone, Canada and the United Kingdom.
Therefore, changes in the value of foreign currencies affect the consolidated financial statements when translated into U.S.
Dollars.
The functional currency for substantially all subsidiaries outside the U.S. is the local currency.
Financial statements for these subsidiaries are translated into U.S.
Dollars at period-end exchange rates as to the assets and liabilities and monthly average exchange rates as to revenues, expenses and cash flows.
For these countries, currency translation adjustments are recognized in stockholders’ equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss), net, whereas transaction gains and losses are recognized in foreign exchange transaction losses, net in the consolidated statement of operations.
Use of Estimates The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
Actual results could differ from those estimates.
73 Research and Development Costs Research and development costs, which were not material for any periods presented, are expensed as incurred.
Revenue Recognition Nielsen recognizes revenues when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, services have been rendered or information has been delivered, the fee is fixed or determinable and the collectability of the related revenue is reasonably assured.
A significant portion of the Company’s revenue is generated from information (primarily retail measurement and consumer panel services) and measurement (primarily from television, radio, online and mobile audiences) services.
The Company generally recognizes revenue from the sale of services as the services are performed, which is usually ratably over the term of the contract(s).
Invoiced amounts are recorded as deferred revenue until earned.
Substantially all of the Company’s customer contracts are non-cancellable and non-refundable.
Certain of the Company’s revenue arrangements include multiple deliverables and in these arrangements, the individual deliverables within the contract that have stand-alone value to the customer are separated and recognized upon delivery based upon the Company’s best estimate of their selling prices.
These arrangements are not significant to the Company’s results of operations.
In certain cases, software is included as part of these arrangements to allow Nielsen’s customers to view delivered information and is provided for the term of the arrangement and is not significant to the marketing effort and is not sold separately.
Accordingly, software provided to Nielsen’s customers is considered to be incidental to the arrangements and is not recognized as a separate element.
A discussion of Nielsen’s revenue recognition policies, by segment, follows: Buy Revenue from the Buy segment, primarily from retail measurement services and consumer panel services is recognized over the period during which the services are performed and information is delivered to the customer, primarily on a straight-line basis.
The Company provides insights and solutions to customers through analytical studies that are recognized into revenue as value is delivered to the customer.
The pattern of revenue recognition for these contracts varies depending on the terms of the individual contracts, and may be recognized proportionally or deferred until the end of the contract term and recognized when the information has been delivered to the customer.
Watch Revenue from the Watch segment is primarily generated from television, radio, online and mobile measurement services and recognized over the contract period, as the service is delivered to the customer, primarily on a straight-line basis.
Deferred Costs Incremental direct costs incurred related to establishing or significantly expanding a panel in a designated market and costs incurred to build the infrastructure to service new clients, are deferred at the point when Nielsen determines them to be recoverable.
Prior to this point, these cost are expensed as incurred.
These deferred costs are typically amortized through cost of revenues over the original contract period beginning when the panel or infrastructure to service new clients is ready for its intended use.
Advertising and Marketing Costs Advertising and marketing costs are expensed as incurred and are reflected as selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
These costs include all brand advertising, telemarketing, direct mail and other sales promotion associated with marketing/media research services.
Advertising and marketing costs totaled $21 million, $25 million and $19 million for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
74 Computation of Net Income per Share Basic net income per share is computed using the weighted-average number of common stock outstanding during the period.
Diluted net income per share is computed using the weighted-average number of shares of common stock and dilutive potential shares of common stock outstanding during the period.
Dilutive potential shares of common stock primarily consist of employee stock options and restricted stock.
Employee stock options, restricted stock and similar equity instruments granted by the Company are treated as potential common stock outstanding in computing diluted earnings per share.
Diluted stock outstanding include restricted stock units and the dilutive effect of in-the-money options which is calculated based on the average share price for each period using the treasury stock method.
Under the treasury stock method, the amount the employee must pay for exercising stock options, the amount of compensation cost for future service that the Company has not yet recognized, and in 2014 and 2015 the amount of benefits that would be recorded in additional paid-in capital when the award becomes deductible for tax purposes are assumed to be used to repurchase stock.
In 2016, upon the adoption of ASU 2016-09, “Compensation – Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting,” the Company removed the excess tax benefit from its assumed proceeds under the treasury stock method.
The two-class method is an earnings allocation method for computing earnings/(loss) per share when a company’s capital structure includes either two or more classes of common stock or common stock and participating securities.
This method determines earnings/(loss) per share based on dividends declared on common stock and participating securities (i.e., distributed earnings), as well as participation rights of participating securities in any undistributed earnings.
The two-class method did not have a significant impact on the calculation or presentation of earnings per share for any of the periods presented.
The effect of 4,351,564, 1,650,708 and 1,593,807 shares of common stock equivalents under stock compensation plans were excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively, as such shares would have been anti-dilutive.
Comprehensive Income/(Loss) Comprehensive income/(loss) is reported in the accompanying consolidated statements of comprehensive income/(loss) and consists of net income and other gains and losses, net of tax affecting equity that are excluded from net income.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include cash and short-term, highly liquid investments with an original maturity date of three months or less.
Cash and cash equivalents are carried at fair value.
Accounts Receivable The Company extends non-interest bearing trade credit to its customers in the ordinary course of business.
To minimize credit risk, ongoing credit evaluations of client’s financial condition are performed.
An estimate of the allowance for doubtful accounts is made when collection of the full amount is no longer probable or returns are expected.
During the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, the Company sold $202 million and $137 million, respectively, of accounts receivables to third parties and recorded an immaterial loss on the sale to interest expense, net in the consolidated statement of operations.
As of December 31, 2017 and 2016, $110 million and $71 million, respectively, remained outstanding.
The sales were accounted for as true sales, without recourse.
We maintain servicing responsibilities of the receivables, for which the related costs are not significant.
The proceeds of $202 million and $137 million from the sales were reported as a component of the changes in trade and other receivables, net within operating activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
75 Other Significant Accounting Policies The following table includes other significant accounting policies that are described in other notes to the financial statements, including the related note: Significant Accounting Policy Note Investments 7 Financial Instruments 7 Derivative Financial Instruments 7 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets 4 Property, Plant and Equipment 6 Impairment of Long-Lived Assets 4&6 Pensions and Other Post Retirement Benefits 9 Stock-Based Compensation 12 Income Taxes 13 2.
Summary of Recent Accounting Pronouncements Revenue Recognition In May 2014, the FASB issued an Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”), “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”.
The new revenue recognition standard provides a five step analysis of transactions to determine when and how revenue is recognized.
The new model will require revenue recognition to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration a company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services and shall be applied retrospectively to each period presented or as a cumulative-effect adjustment as of the date of adoption if using the modified retrospective transition methods.
In addition, the new standard requires disclosure of the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers.
This standard is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2017.
In 2014, the Company established a cross-functional implementation team consisting of representatives from across all of its business segments.
Management utilized a bottoms-up approach to analyze the impact of the standard on our contract portfolio by reviewing the current accounting policies and practices to identify potential differences that would result from applying the requirements of the new standard to our revenue contracts.
In addition, management identified, and are in the process of implementing appropriate changes to our business processes, systems and controls to support the recognition and disclosure under the new standard.
Based on management’s assessment, it believes the most significant impact the adoption of the new standard will have on its consolidated financial statements are the required financial statement disclosures.
Except for the required financial statement disclosures, the Company does not believe the adoption of the ASU will have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements and will adopt the ASU using the modified retrospective transition method.
Leases In February 2016, the FASB issued an ASU, “Leases.” The new standard amends the recognition of lease assets and lease liabilities by lessees for those leases currently classified as operating leases and amends disclosure requirements associated with leasing arrangements.
The new standard is effective for fiscal years and interim periods within those fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018.
Early adoption is permitted.
The new standard must be adopted using a modified retrospective transition, and provides for certain practical expedients.
Transition will require application of the new guidance at the beginning of the earliest comparative period presented.
While Nielsen continues to assess the impact the adoption of this ASU will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statements, Nielsen expects it will increase assets and liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet.
Financial Instruments – Credit Losses In June 2016, the FASB issued an ASU, “Financial Instruments – Credit Losses (Topic 326), Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments.” The standard significantly changes how entities will measure credit losses for most financial assets and certain other instruments that are not measured at fair value through net income.
The standard will replace today’s “incurred loss” approach with an “expected loss” model for instruments measured at amortized cost.
For available-for-sale debt securities, entities will be required to record allowances rather than reduce the carrying amount, as they do today under the other-than-temporary impairment model.
It also simplifies the accounting model for purchased credit-impaired debt securities and loans.
The new standard is effective for fiscal years and interim periods within those fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019.
Early adoption is permitted for fiscal years and interim periods within those fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018.
Nielsen is currently assessing the impact the adoption of this ASU will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
76 Intangibles- Goodwill and Other In January 2017, the FASB issued an ASU, “Intangibles—Goodwill and Other” to simplify the subsequent measurement of goodwill.
The update requires only a single-step quantitative test to identify and measure impairment based on the excess of a reporting unit's carrying amount over its fair value.
A qualitative assessment may still be completed first for an entity to determine if a quantitative impairment test is necessary.
The update is effective for fiscal year 2021 and is to be adopted on a prospective basis.
Early adoption is permitted for interim or annual goodwill impairment tests performed on testing dates after January 1, 2017.
Nielsen elected to early adopt this ASU effective January 1, 2017.
There was no impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Other Income—Gains and Losses from the Derecognition of Nonfinancial Assets In February 2017, the FASB issued an ASU, “Other Income—Gains and Losses from the Derecognition of Nonfinancial Assets," which clarifies the scope and application of ASC 610-20 on the sale or transfer of nonfinancial assets and in substance nonfinancial assets to noncustomers, including partial sales.
It requires the application of certain recognition and measurement principles in ASC 606 when derecognizing nonfinancial assets and in substance nonfinancial assets, and the counterparty is not a customer.
This ASU is effective for fiscal years (and interim reporting periods within those years) beginning after December 15, 2017.
The Company is currently assessing the impact the adoption of this ASU will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Retirement Benefits: Improving the Presentation of Net Periodic Pension Cost and Net Periodic Postretirement Benefit Cost In March 2017, the FASB issued an ASU, “Compensation — Retirement Benefits: Improving the Presentation of Net Periodic Pension Cost and Net Periodic Postretirement Benefit Cost,” which will change the presentation of net periodic benefit cost related to employer sponsored defined benefit plans and other postretirement benefits.
Service cost will be included within the same income statement line item as other compensation costs arising from services rendered during the period, while other components of net periodic benefit pension cost will be presented separately outside of operating income.
Additionally, only service costs may be capitalized in assets.
This ASU is effective for fiscal years (and interim reporting periods within those years) beginning after December 15, 2017.
Nielsen does not expect the adoption of this ASU to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Compensation- Stock Compensation In May 2017, the FASB issued an ASU, Compensation- Stock Compensation (Topic 718), “Scope of Modification Accounting,” which amends the scope of modification accounting for share-based payment arrangements.
The standard provides guidance on the types of changes to the terms or conditions of share-based payment awards to which an entity would be required to apply modification accounting under ASC 718.
Specifically, an entity would not apply modification accounting if the fair value, vesting conditions, and classification of the awards are the same immediately before and after the modification.
The new standard is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2017 and interim periods within those years.
Early adoption is permitted.
Nielsen does not expect the adoption of this ASU to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Derivatives and Hedging In August 2017, the FASB issued an ASU “Derivatives and Hedging-Targeted Improvements to Accounting for Hedging Activities” (“ASU 2017-12”).
The amendments expand an entity’s ability to apply hedge accounting for nonfinancial and financial risk components and allow for a simplified approach for fair value hedging of interest rate risk.
ASU 2017-12 eliminates the need to separately measure and report hedge ineffectiveness and generally requires the entire change in fair value of a hedging instrument to be presented in the same income statement line as the hedged item.
Additionally, the standard simplifies the hedge documentation and effectiveness assessment requirements under the previous guidance.
The amendments of this ASU are effective for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, with early adoption permitted.
Nielsen elected to early adopt this ASU during the third quarter of 2017.
See footnote 7 “Fair Value Measurement,” for the additional disclosures related to this ASU.
The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements 3. Business Acquisitions and Dispositions Acquisitions On February 1, 2017, Nielsen completed the acquisition of Gracenote, through the purchase of 100% of Gracenote’s outstanding common stock for a total purchase price of $585 million.
Nielsen acquired the data and technology that underpins the programming guides and personnel user experience for major video, music, audio and sports content.
This acquisition expands Nielsen’s footprint with major clients including Gracenote’s global content database which spans across platforms including multichannel video programing distributors (MVPD’s), smart television, streaming music services, connected devices, media players and in-car infotainment systems.
77 The acquisition of Gracenote was accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting which requires, among other things, the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed be recognized at their fair values as of the acquisition date.
Effective February 1, 2017, the financial results of Gracenote were included within the Watch segment of Nielsen’s consolidated financial statements.
For the year ended December 31, 2017, the Company’s consolidated statement of operations includes $215 million of revenues related to the Gracenote acquisition.
The purchase price was allocated based upon the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition using available information and certain assumptions management believed reasonable.
The following table summarizes the purchase price allocation: (IN MILLIONS) Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed: Cash $ 11 Other current assets 56 Property and equipment 12 Goodwill 316 Amortizable intangible assets 341 Other long-term assets 11 Deferred revenue (22 ) Other current liabilities (28 ) Deferred tax liabilities (105 ) Other long-term liabilities (7 ) Total $ 585 As of the acquisition date, the fair value of accounts receivable approximated historical cost.
The gross contractual receivable was $37 million and is included in other current assets above, of which $1 million was deemed uncollectible.
The allocation of the purchase price to goodwill and identified intangible assets was $316 million and $341 million, respectively.
All of the Gracenote related goodwill and intangible assets are attributable to Nielsen’s Watch segment.
As of December 31, 2017, $21 million of goodwill is expected to be deductible for income tax purposes.
Intangible assets and their estimated useful lives consist of the following: (IN MILLIONS) Description Amount Useful Life Customer-related intangibles $ 109 10 - 15 years Content database 168 12 - 16 years Trade names and trademarks 7 5 years Computer software 57 7-8 years Total $ 341 Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the consideration transferred over the net assets recognized and represents expected synergies and the going concern nature of Gracenote.
The Company incurred acquisition-related expenses of $6 million for the year ended December 31, 2017, which primarily consisted of transaction fees, legal, accounting and other professional services that are included in selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of operations.
The following unaudited pro forma information presents the consolidated results of operations of the Company and Gracenote for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, as if the acquisition had occurred on January 1, 2016, with pro forma adjustments to give effect to amortization of intangible assets, an increase in interest expense from acquisition financing, and certain other adjustments: Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 Revenues $ 6,590 $ 6,532 Income $ 443 $ 499 The unaudited pro forma results do not reflect any synergies and are not necessarily indicative of the results that the Company would have attained had the acquisition of Gracenote been completed as of the beginning of the reporting period.
78 For the year ended December 31, 2017, excluding Gracenote, Nielsen paid cash consideration of $210 million associated with both current period and previously executed acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Had these 2017 acquisitions occurred as of January 1, 2016, the impact on Nielsen’s consolidated results of operations would not have been material.
For the year ended December 31, 2016, Nielsen paid cash consideration of $285 million associated with both current period and previously executed acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Had these 2016 acquisitions occurred as of January 1, 2016, the impact on Nielsen’s consolidated results of operations would not have been material.
For the year ended December 31, 2015, Nielsen paid cash consideration of $246 million associated with both current period and previously executed acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Included in this amount is $45 million for an additional 13.5% interest in Nielsen Catalina Solutions (“NCS”), a joint venture between us and Catalina that we historically accounted for under the equity method of accounting.
As part of this transaction Nielsen gained control of NCS and, as such accounted for it as a step-acquisition and calculated the fair value of the investment immediately before the acquisition to be $161 million.
The fair value of the investment was calculated by an income approach using a discounted cash flow analysis, which requires the use of various assumptions, including expectations of future cash flows, growth rates, discount rates and tax rates in developing the present value of future cash flows.
As a result, during the fourth quarter of 2015, Nielsen recorded a $158 million gain on the investment in NCS to other income/(expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations.
Commencing October 1, 2015, NCS was reflected as a consolidated subsidiary within Nielsen’s consolidated financial statements.
Had these 2015 acquisitions occurred as of January 1, 2015, the impact on Nielsen’s consolidated results of operations would not have been material.
Dispositions In December 2016, Nielsen completed the sale of Claritas, a business focusing on consumer segmentation insights within the Company’s Buy segment, for cash consideration of $34 million and a note receivable for $60 million.
The note is payable at any time over three years and bears interest at 3% in year one, 5% in year two and 7% in year three.
As a result of this transaction the Company recorded a $14 million gain on sale to other income/(expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations.
This disposition did not qualify to be classified as a discontinued operation.
In 2017, upon finalization of working capital and other settlement matters the Company reduced the note receivable to $51 million and recorded a charge of $13 million to other income/(expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations.
In November 2015, Nielsen completed the sale of the National Research Group, Inc., a leader in providing market research to movie studios within the Company’s Watch segment, for total cash consideration of $34 million and recorded an $18 million gain on the sale to other income/(expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations.
This disposition did not qualify to be classified as a discontinued operations.
There were no discontinued operations for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015.
4.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets Goodwill Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets, consisting of certain trade names and trademarks, are each tested for impairment on an annual basis and whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such asset may not be recoverable.
Nielsen has designated October 1st as the date in which the annual assessment is performed as this timing corresponds with the development of the Company’s formal budget and business plan review.
Nielsen reviews the recoverability of its goodwill by comparing the estimated fair values of reporting units with their respective carrying amounts.
The Company established, and continues to evaluate, its reporting units based on its internal reporting structure and defines such reporting units at its operating segment level or one level below.
The estimates of fair value of a reporting unit are determined using a combination of valuation techniques, primarily an income approach using a discounted cash flow analysis supplemented by a market-based approach.
A discounted cash flow analysis requires the use of various assumptions, including expectations of future cash flows, growth rates, discount rates and tax rates in developing the present value of future cash flow projections.
The market-based approach utilizes available market comparisons such as indicative industry multiples that are applied to current year revenue and earnings as well as recent comparable transactions.
The Company’s 2017, 2016 and 2015 annual assessments of its reporting units did not result in an impairment for goodwill.
Goodwill is stated at historical cost less accumulated impairments losses, if any.
79 The table below summarizes the changes in the carrying amount of goodwill by reportable segment for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
(IN MILLIONS) Buy Watch Total Balance, December 31, 2015 $ 2,789 $ 4,994 $ 7,783 Acquisitions, divestitures and other adjustments (31 ) 170 139 Effect of foreign currency translation (62 ) (15 ) (77 ) Balance, December 31, 2016 $ 2,696 $ 5,149 $ 7,845 Acquisitions, divestitures and other adjustments 2 473 475 Effect of foreign currency translation 146 29 175 Balance, December 31, 2017 $ 2,844 $ 5,651 $ 8,495 Cumulative impairments $ — $ 376 $ 376 At December 31, 2017, $61 million of goodwill is expected to be deductible for income tax purposes.
Other Intangible Assets Intangible assets with finite lives are stated at historical cost, less accumulated amortization and impairment losses.
These intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the following estimated useful lives, which are reviewed annually.
Nielsen has purchased and internally developed software to facilitate its global information processing, financial reporting and client access needs.
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of software programs are expensed as incurred.
Costs that are incurred to produce the finished product after technological feasibility has been established are capitalized as an intangible asset and are amortized over the estimated useful life.
If events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of software may not be recovered, a recoverability analysis is performed based on estimated undiscounted cash flows to be generated from the software in the future.
If the analysis indicates that the carrying value is not recoverable from the future cash flows, the software cost is written down to estimated fair value and an impairment is recognized.
These estimates are subject to revision as market conditions and as our assessments change.
The impairment test for other indefinite-lived intangible assets consists of a comparison of the fair value of the intangible asset with its carrying amount.
If the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess.
The estimates of fair value of trade names and trademarks are determined using a “relief from royalty” discounted cash flow valuation methodology.
Significant assumptions inherent in this methodology include estimates of royalty rates and discount rates.
Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the respective intangible assets.
Assumptions about royalty rates are based on the rates at which comparable trade names and trademarks are being licensed in the marketplace.
There was no impairment noted in any period presented with respect to the Company’s indefinite-lived intangible assets.
Nielsen is required to assess whether the value of the Company’s amortizable intangible assets have been impaired whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets might not be recoverable.
Nielsen does not perform a periodic assessment of assets for impairment in the absence of such information or indicators.
Conditions that would necessitate an impairment assessment include a significant decline in the observable market value of an asset, a significant change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used or a significant adverse change that would indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets is not recoverable.
Recoverability of assets that are held and used is measured by comparing the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows expected to be derived from an asset (or a group of assets) to their carrying value.
If the carrying value of the asset (or the group of assets) exceeds the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows, impairment is considered to exist.
If impairment is considered to exist based on undiscounted cash flows, the impairment charge is measured using an estimation of the assets’ fair value, typically using a discounted cash flow method.
The identification of impairment indicators, the estimation of future cash flows and the determination of fair values for assets (or groups of assets) requires Nielsen to make significant judgments concerning the identification and validation of impairment indicators, expected cash flows and applicable discount rates.
These estimates are subject to revision as market conditions and our assessments change.
There was no impairment or indicators of impairment noted in any period presented with respect to the Company’s amortizable intangible assets.
80 The table below summarizes the carrying value of such intangible assets and their estimated useful lives: Gross Amounts Accumulated Amortization Estimated Weighted December 31, December 31, December 31, December 31, (IN MILLIONS) Useful Lives Average 2017 2016 2017 2016 Indefinite-lived intangibles: Trade names and trademarks $ 1,921 $ 1,921 $ — $ — Amortized intangibles: Trade names and trademarks 5-20 years 13 years 139 140 (92 ) (88 ) Customer-related intangibles 6-25 years 21 years 3,174 3,035 (1,463 ) (1,312 ) Covenants-not-to-compete 1-7 years 3 years 39 39 (37 ) (36 ) Content databases(1) 12-16 years 12 years 168 — (12 ) — Computer software 3-10 years 5 years 2,681 2,223 (1,498 ) (1,258 ) Patents and other 3-10 years 6 years 171 173 (114 ) (101 ) Total $ 6,372 $ 5,610 $ (3,216 ) $ (2,795 ) (1) The content databases were acquired as part of the Gracenote acquisition on February 1, 2017.
These databases represent metadata used in Gracenote’s Video, Music/Auto and Sports product offerings that is not easily replicated due to its quantity and the relationships needed to acquire the data.
The estimated remaining useful life of these content databases is 12 to 16 years.
The amortization expense for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 was $454 million, $425 million and $408 million, respectively.
These amounts include amortization expense associated with computer software of $250 million, $232 million and $219 million for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Certain of the trade names associated with Nielsen are deemed indefinite-lived intangible assets, as their associated Nielsen brand awareness and recognition has existed for over 50 years and the Company intends to continue to utilize these trade names.
There are also no legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic or other factors that may limit their estimated useful lives.
Nielsen reconsiders the remaining estimated useful life of indefinite-lived intangible assets each reporting period.
The Company’s 2017, 2016 and 2015 annual assessments did not result in an impairment for any of its indefinite-lived intangible assets.
All other intangible assets are subject to amortization.
Future amortization expense is estimated to be as follows: (IN MILLIONS) For the year ending December 31: 2018 $ 487 2019 468 2020 419 2021 361 2022 257 Thereafter 1,164 Total $ 3,156 81 5.
Changes in and Reclassification out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss by Component The table below summarizes the changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of tax, by component for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
Currency Translation Post Employment Adjustments Cash Flow Hedges Benefits Total (IN MILLIONS) Balance December 31, 2016 $ (856 ) $ (1 ) $ (354 ) $ (1,211 ) Other comprehensive income before reclassifications 248 8 (3 ) 253 Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss $ — $ 3 $ 17 20 Net current period other comprehensive income 248 11 14 273 Net current period other comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interest 2 — — 2 Net current period other comprehensive income attributable to Nielsen stockholders 246 11 14 271 Balance December 31, 2017 $ (610 ) $ 10 $ (340 ) $ (940 ) Currency Translation Post Employment Adjustments Cash Flow Hedges Benefits Total (IN MILLIONS) Balance December 31, 2015 $ (767 ) $ (3 ) $ (289 ) $ (1,059 ) Other comprehensive loss before reclassifications (94 ) (3 ) (77 ) (174 ) Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss — $ 5 $ 12 17 Net current period other comprehensive (loss)/income (94 ) 2 (65 ) (157 ) Net current period other comprehensive loss attributable to noncontrolling interest (5 ) — — (5 ) Net current period other comprehensive (loss)/income attributable to Nielsen stockholders (89 ) 2 (65 ) (152 ) Balance December 31, 2016 $ (856 ) $ (1 ) $ (354 ) $ (1,211 ) The table below summarizes the reclassification of accumulated other comprehensive loss by component for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
Amount Reclassified from Accumulated Other (IN MILLIONS) Comprehensive Loss Details about Accumulated Other Comprehensive Affected Line Item in the Year Ended December 31, Consolidated Income components 2017 2016 Statement of Operations Cash flow hedges Interest rate contracts $ 5 $ 7 Interest expense (2 ) (2 ) Benefit for income taxes $ 3 $ 5 Total, net of tax Amortization of Post-Employment Benefits Actuarial loss $ 19 $ 17 (a) (2 ) (5 ) Benefit for income taxes $ 17 $ 12 Total, net of tax Total reclassification for the period $ 20 $ 17 Net of tax (a) This accumulated other comprehensive loss component is included in the computation of net periodic pension cost.
82 6.
Property, Plant and Equipment Property, plant and equipment are carried at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Property, plant and equipment are depreciated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives.
Nielsen is required to assess whether the value of our long-lived assets, including the Company’s buildings, improvements, technical and other equipment have been impaired whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets might not be recoverable.
Nielsen does not perform a periodic assessment of assets for impairment in the absence of such information or indicators.
Conditions that would necessitate an impairment assessment include a significant decline in the observable market value of an asset, a significant change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used or a significant adverse change that would indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets is not recoverable.
Recoverability of assets that are held and used is measured by comparing the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows expected to be derived from an asset (or a group of assets) to their carrying value.
If the carrying value of the asset (or the group of assets) exceeds the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows, impairment is considered to exist.
If impairment is considered to exist based on undiscounted cash flows, the impairment charge is measured using an estimation of the assets’ fair value, typically using a discounted cash flow method.
The identification of impairment indicators, the estimation of future cash flows and the determination of fair values for assets (or groups of assets) requires Nielsen to make significant judgments concerning the identification and validation of impairment indicators, expected cash flows and applicable discount rates.
These estimates are subject to revision as market conditions and our assessments change.
There was no impairment or indicators of impairment noted in any period presented with respect to the Company’s finite long-lived assets.
The following tables summarizes the carrying value of our property, plant and equipment including the associated useful lives: Estimated December 31, December 31, (IN MILLIONS) Useful Life 2017 2016 Land and buildings 25-50 years $ 371 $ 335 Information and communication equipment 3-10 years 994 858 Furniture, equipment and other 3-10 years 121 103 1,486 1,296 Less accumulated depreciation and amortization (1,004 ) (825 ) $ 482 $ 471 Depreciation and amortization expense from operations related to property, plant and equipment was $171 million, $165 million and $160 million for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
The above amounts include amortization expense on assets under capital leases and other financing obligations of $47 million, $37 million and $23 million for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Capital leases and other financing obligations are comprised primarily of land and buildings and information and communication equipment.
Gross and net book value of assets under capital leases were as follows: (IN MILLIONS) December 31, 2017 Gross Book Value Accumulated Depreciation Net Book Value Land and buildings $ 178 $ (75 ) $ 103 Information and communication equipment 151 (84 ) 67 $ 329 $ (159 ) $ 170 December 31, 2016 Gross Book Value Accumulated Depreciation Net Book Value Land and buildings $ 174 $ (69 ) $ 105 Information and communication equipment 161 (72 ) 89 $ 335 $ (141 ) $ 194 83 7.
Fair Value Measurements Nielsen’s financial instruments include cash and cash equivalents, investments, long-term debt and derivative financial instruments.
These financial instruments potentially subject Nielsen to concentrations of credit risk.
To minimize the risk of credit loss, these financial instruments are primarily held with acknowledged financial institutions.
The carrying value of Nielsen’s financial instruments approximate fair value, except for differences with respect to long-term, fixed and variable-rate debt and certain differences relating to investments accounted for at cost.
The fair value of financial instruments is generally determined by reference to market values resulting from trading on a national securities exchange or in an over-the-counter market.
In cases where quoted market prices are not available, fair value is based on estimates using present value or other valuation techniques.
Cash equivalents have original maturities of three months or less.
In addition, the Company has accounts receivable that are not collateralized.
The Buy and Watch segments service high quality clients dispersed across many geographic areas.
The Company analyzes the aging of accounts receivable, historical bad debts, customer creditworthiness and current economic trends in determining the allowance for doubtful accounts.
Investments include available-for-sale securities carried at fair value, or at cost if not publicly traded, investments in affiliates, and a trading asset portfolio maintained to generate returns to offset changes in certain liabilities related to deferred compensation arrangements.
For the available-for-sale securities, any unrealized holding gains and losses, net of deferred income taxes, are excluded from operating results and are recognized in stockholders’ equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) net, until realized.
Nielsen assesses declines in the value of individual investments to determine whether such decline is other than temporary and thus the investment is impaired by considering available evidence.
No impairment charge was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received from selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
When determining fair value, the Company considers the principal or most advantageous market in which the Company would transact, and also considers assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the asset or liability, such as inherent risk, transfer restrictions, and risk of non-performance.
There are three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value: Level 1: Quoted market prices available in active markets for identical assets or liabilities as of the reporting date.
Level 2: Pricing inputs other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1, which are either directly or indirectly observable as of the reporting date.
Level 3: Pricing inputs that are generally unobservable and may not be corroborated by market data.
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured on a Recurring Basis The Company’s financial assets and liabilities are measured and recorded at fair value, except for equity method investments, cost method investments, and long-term debt.
Financial assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurements.
The Company’s assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurements requires judgment, and may affect the valuation of the assets and liabilities being measured and their placement within the fair value hierarchy.
The following table summarizes the valuation of the Company’s material financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of December 31, 2017 and 2016: December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Assets: Plan assets for deferred compensation (1) $ 33 33 — — Investment in mutual funds (2) 2 2 — — Interest rate swap arrangements (3) 17 — 17 — Total $ 52 $ 35 $ 17 — Liabilities: Interest rate swap arrangements (3) — — — — Deferred compensation liabilities (4) 33 33 — — Total 33 $ 33 — — 84 December 31, 2016 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Assets: Plan assets for deferred compensation (1) 32 32 — — Investment in mutual funds (2) 2 2 — — Interest rate swap arrangements (3) 3 — 3 — Total $ 37 $ 34 3 — Liabilities: Interest rate swap arrangements (3) $ 5 — 5 — Deferred compensation liabilities (4) 32 32 — — Total $ 37 $ 32 5 — (1) Plan assets are comprised of investments in mutual funds, which are intended to fund liabilities arising from deferred compensation plans.
These investments are carried at fair value, which is based on quoted market prices at period end in active markets.
These investments are classified as trading securities with any gains or losses resulting from changes in fair value recorded in other income/(expense), net in the consolidated statements of operations.
(2) Investments in mutual funds are money-market accounts held with the intention of funding certain specific retirement plans.
(3) Derivative financial instruments include interest rate swap arrangements recorded at fair value based on externally-developed valuation models that use readily observable market parameters and the consideration of counterparty risk.
(4) The Company offers certain employees the opportunity to participate in a deferred compensation plan.
A participant’s deferrals are invested in a variety of participant directed stock and bond mutual funds and are classified as trading securities.
Changes in the fair value of these securities are measured using quoted prices in active markets based on the market price per unit multiplied by the number of units held exclusive of any transaction costs.
A corresponding adjustment for changes in fair value of the trading securities is also reflected in the changes in fair value of the deferred compensation obligation.
Derivative Financial Instruments Nielsen uses interest rate swap derivative instruments principally to manage the risk that changes in interest rates will affect the cash flows of its underlying debt obligations.
To qualify for hedge accounting, the hedging relationship must meet several conditions with respect to documentation, probability of occurrence, hedge effectiveness and reliability of measurement.
Nielsen documents the relationship between hedging instruments and hedged items, as well as its risk management objective and strategy for undertaking various hedge transactions as well as the hedge effectiveness assessment, both at the hedge inception and on an ongoing basis.
Nielsen recognizes all derivatives at fair value either as assets or liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets and changes in the fair values of such instruments are recognized currently in earnings unless specific hedge accounting criteria are met.
If specific cash flow hedge accounting criteria are met, Nielsen recognizes the changes in fair value of these instruments in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss).
Nielsen manages exposure to possible defaults on derivative financial instruments by monitoring the concentration of risk that Nielsen has with any individual bank and through the use of minimum credit quality standards for all counterparties.
Nielsen does not require collateral or other security in relation to derivative financial instruments.
A derivative contract entered into between Nielsen or certain of its subsidiaries and a counterparty that was also a lender under Nielsen’s senior secured credit facilities at the time the derivative contract was entered into is guaranteed under the senior secured credit facilities by Nielsen and certain of its subsidiaries (see Note 10 - Long-term Debt and Other Financing Arrangements for more information).
Since it is Nielsen’s policy to only enter into derivative contracts with banks of internationally acknowledged standing, Nielsen considers the counterparty risk to be remote.
It is Nielsen’s policy to have an International Swaps and Derivatives Association (“ISDA”) Master Agreement established with every bank with which it has entered into any derivative contract.
Under each of these ISDA Master Agreements, Nielsen agrees to settle only the net amount of the combined market values of all derivative contracts outstanding with any one counterparty should that counterparty default.
Certain of the ISDA Master Agreements contain cross-default provisions where if the Company either defaults in payment obligations under its credit facility or if such obligations are accelerated by the lenders, then the Company could also be declared in default on its derivative obligations.
At December 31, 2017, Nielsen had no material exposure to potential economic losses due to counterparty credit default risk or cross-default risk on its derivative financial instruments.
85 Interest Rate Risk Nielsen is exposed to cash flow interest rate risk on the floating-rate U.S. Dollar and Euro Term Loans, and uses floating-to-fixed interest rate swaps to hedge this exposure.
For these derivatives, Nielsen reports the after-tax gain or loss from the effective portion of the hedge as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) and reclassifies it into earnings in the same period or periods in which the hedged transaction affects earnings, and within the same income statement line item as the impact of the hedged transaction.
In August 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a four-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of October 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.60%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In July 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of October 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.66%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In April 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of July 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.63%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In March 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a five-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of July 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 2.00%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In February 2017, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of July 10, 2017.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.73%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In June 2016, the company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date of June 9, 2016.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 0.86%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In July 2015, the Company entered into a $150 million in notional amount of three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date in July 2016.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of the interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.62%.
This derivative instrument has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In April 2015, the Company entered into a $150 million in notional amount of three-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date in April 2016.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of the interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.40%.
This derivative instrument has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
In November 2014, the Company entered into $250 million in aggregate notional amount of a two-year forward interest rate swap agreement with a starting date in May, 2016.
This agreement fixes the LIBOR-related portion of interest rates of a corresponding amount of the Company’s variable-rate debt at an average rate of 1.78%.
This derivative has been designated as an interest rate cash flow hedge.
86 As of December 31, 2017 the Company had the following outstanding interest rate swaps utilized in the management of its interest rate risk: Notional Amount Maturity Date Currency Interest rate swaps designated as hedging instruments US Dollar term loan floating-to-fixed rate swaps $ 250,000,000 May 2018 US Dollar US Dollar term loan floating-to-fixed rate swaps $ 150,000,000 April 2019 US Dollar US Dollar term loan floating-to-fixed rate swaps $ 250,000,000 June 2019 US Dollar US Dollar term loan floating-to-fixed rate swaps $ 150,000,000 July 2019 US Dollar US Dollar term loan floating-to-fixed rate swaps $ 250,000,000 July 2020 US Dollar US Dollar term loan floating-to-fixed rate swaps $ 250,000,000 July 2020 US Dollar US Dollar term loan floating-to-fixed rate swaps $ 250,000,000 October 2020 US Dollar US Dollar term loan floating-to-fixed rate swaps $ 250,000,000 October 2021 US Dollar US Dollar term loan floating-to-fixed rate swaps $ 250,000,000 July 2022 US Dollar The effect of cash flow hedge accounting on the consolidated statement of operations for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016: Interest Expense Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Interest expense- (Location in the consolidated statement of operations in which the effects of cash flow hedges are recorded) $ 374 $ 333 $ 311 Amount of loss reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income into income, net of tax $ 3 $ 5 $ 7 Amount of loss reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income into income as a result that a forecasted transaction is no longer probable of occurring, net of tax $ — $ — $ — Nielsen expects to recognize approximately $3 million of net pre-tax losses from accumulated other comprehensive loss to interest expense in the next 12 months associated with its interest-related derivative financial instruments.
Foreign Currency Exchange Risk During the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, Nielsen recorded a net gain of zero and $1 million respectively, associated with foreign currency derivative financial instruments within foreign currency exchange transactions losses, net in Nielsen’s consolidated statements of operations.
As of December 31, 2017 and 2016, the notional amounts of the outstanding foreign currency derivative financial instruments were $74 million and $77 million, respectively.
See Note 10 – “Long-term Debt and Other Financing Arrangements” for more information on the long-term debt transactions referenced in this note.
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Balance Sheets The fair values of the Company’s derivative instruments as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 were as follows: December 31, 2017 December 31, 2016 Accounts Payable Accounts Payable Derivatives Designated as Hedging Instruments Other Non- Current and Other Current Other Non- Current Other Non- Current and Other Current Other Non- Current (IN MILLIONS) Assets Liabilities Liabilities Assets Liabilities Liabilities Interest rate swaps $ 17 $ — $ — $ 3 $ 1 $ 4 87 Derivatives in Cash Flow Hedging Relationships The pre-tax effect of derivative instruments in cash flow hedging relationships for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 was as follows (amounts in millions): Amount of (Gain)/Loss Amount of Loss Recognized in OCI Location of Loss Reclassified from OCI on Derivatives Reclassified from OCI into Income Derivatives in Cash Flow (Effective Portion) into Income (Effective Portion) Hedging Relationships December 31, (Effective Portion) December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 2017 2016 2015 Interest rate swaps $ (13 ) $ 3 $ 14 Interest expense $ 5 $ 7 $ 12 Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Nonrecurring Basis The Company is required, on a nonrecurring basis, to adjust the carrying value for certain assets using fair value measurements.
The Company’s equity method investments, cost method investments, and non-financial assets, such as goodwill, intangible assets, and property, plant and equipment, are measured at fair value when there is an indicator of impairment and recorded at fair value only when an impairment charge is recognized.
The Company did not measure any material non-financial assets or liabilities at fair value during the years ended December 31, 2017 or 2016.
8.
Restructuring Activities Restructuring charges primarily relate to employee separation packages.
The amounts are calculated based on salary levels and past service periods.
Severance costs are generally charged to earnings when planned employee terminations are approved.
A summary of the changes in the liabilities for restructuring activities is provided below: Total (IN MILLIONS) Initiatives Balance at December 31, 2014 $ 72 Charges 51 Non cash charges and other adjustments (8 ) Payments (77 ) Balance at December 31, 2015 38 Charges 105 Non cash charges and other adjustments (1 ) Payments (69 ) Balance at December 31, 2016 73 Charges 80 Non cash charges and other adjustments 2 Payments (97 ) Balance at December 31, 2017 $ 58 Of the $58 million in remaining liabilities for restructuring actions, $43 million is expected to be paid within one year and is classified as a current liability within the consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2017.
Productivity Initiatives The Company recorded $80 million in restructuring charges primarily relating to employee severance associated with productivity initiatives and contract termination costs during the year ended December 31, 2017.
The Company recorded $105 million in restructuring charges primarily relating to employee severance associated with productivity initiatives and contract termination costs during the year ended December 31, 2016.
88 The Company recorded $51 million in restructuring charges primarily relating to employee severance associated with productivity initiatives during the year ended December 31, 2015.
9.
Pensions and Other Post-Retirement Benefits Nielsen sponsors both funded and unfunded defined benefit pension plans (the “Pension Plans”) and post-retirement medical plans for some if its employees in the Netherlands, the United States and other international locations.
Pension costs, in respect of defined benefit pension plans, primarily represent the increase in the actuarial present value of the obligation for pension benefits based on employee service during the year and the interest on this obligation in respect of employee service in previous years, net of the expected return on plan assets.
Differences between this expected return and the actual return on these plan assets and actuarial changes are not recognized in the statement of operations, unless the accumulated differences and changes exceed a certain threshold.
Nielsen recognizes obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension plans as expenses in the statement of operations as they are incurred.
The determination of benefit obligations and expenses is based on actuarial models.
In order to measure benefit costs and obligations using these models, critical assumptions are made with regard to the discount rate, the expected return on plan assets and the assumed rate of compensation increases.
Nielsen provides retiree medical benefits to a limited number of participants in the U.S.
Therefore, retiree medical care cost trend rates are not a significant driver of our post retirement costs.
Management reviews these critical assumptions at least annually.
Other assumptions involve demographic factors such as turnover, retirement and mortality rates.
Management reviews these assumptions periodically and updates them as necessary.
The discount rate is the rate at which the benefit obligations could be effectively settled.
For Nielsen’s U.S. plans, the discount rate is based on a bond portfolio that includes only long-term bonds with an Aa rating, or equivalent, from a major rating agency.
For the Dutch and other non-U.S. plans, the discount rate is set by reference to market yields on high-quality corporate bonds.
Nielsen believes the timing and amount of cash flows related to the bonds in these portfolios are expected to match the estimated payment benefit streams of our plans.
Effective January 1, 2016, the Company changed its approach to calculating the discount rate for its retirement benefit pension plans from a weighted-average yield curve approach to a spot-rate approach.
Under the spot-rate approach, the Company uses individual spot rates along the yield curve that correspond with the timing of each future cash outflow for benefit payments in order to calculate interest cost and service cost within net periodic benefit costs.
The spot-rate approach represents a more precise measurement of interest and service cost.
The new approach represents a change in accounting estimate that is inseparable from a change in accounting principle and accordingly is accounted for prospectively.
To determine the expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets, Nielsen considers, for each country, the structure of the asset portfolio and the expected rates of return for each of the components.
For Nielsen’s U.S. plans, a 50 basis point decrease in the expected return on assets would increase pension expense on our principal plans by approximately $1 million per year.
A similar 50 basis point decrease in the expected return on assets would increase pension expense on the Company’s principal Dutch plans by approximately $3 million per year.
The Company assumed that the weighted-averages of long-term returns on our pension plans were 4.6% for the year ended December 31, 2017, 5.1% for the year ended December 31, 2016 and 6.0% for the year ended December 31, 2015.
The expected long-term rate of return is applied to the fair value of pension plan assets.
The actual return on plan assets will vary year to year from this assumption.
Although the actual return on plan assets will vary from year to year, it is appropriate to use long-term expected forecasts in selecting Nielsen’s expected return on plan assets.
As such, there can be no assurance that the Company’s actual return on plan assets will approximate the long-term expected forecasts.
89 A summary of the activity for the Pension Plans follows: Year Ended December 31, 2017 The United (IN MILLIONS) Netherlands States Other Total Change in projected benefit obligation Benefit obligation at beginning of period $ 669 $ 344 $ 629 $ 1,642 Service cost 5 — 8 13 Interest cost 9 12 13 34 Plan participants’ contributions 1 — 1 2 Actuarial loss (gain) (21) 27 — 6 Benefits paid (30 ) (13 ) (23 ) (66 ) Expenses paid (1 ) — (1 ) (2 ) Premiums paid — — (1 ) (1 ) Settlements — — (6 ) (6 ) Effect of foreign currency translation 92 — 58 150 Benefit obligation at end of period 724 370 678 1,772 Change in plan assets Fair value of plan assets at beginning of period 625 233 507 1,365 Actual return on plan assets 32 37 40 109 Employer contributions 3 3 15 21 Plan participants’ contributions 1 — 1 2 Benefits paid (30 ) (13 ) (23 ) (66 ) Expenses paid (1 ) — (1 ) (2 ) Premiums paid — — (1 ) (1 ) Settlements — — (6 ) (6 ) Effect of foreign currency translation 88 — 49 137 Fair value of plan assets at end of period 718 260 581 1,559 Funded status $ (6) $ (110 ) $ (97 ) $ (213 ) Amounts recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheets Pension assets included in other non-current assets — — 23 23 Current liabilities — — (2 ) (2 ) Accrued benefit liability included in other non-current liabilities (6) (110 ) (118 ) (234 ) Net amount recognized $ (6 ) $ (110 ) $ (97 ) $ (213 ) Amounts recognized in Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss), before tax Net (gain)/loss $ (3) $ 7 $ (6) $ (2) Settlement loss — — (1 ) (1) Amortization of net loss (7 ) (6 ) (5 ) (18) Total recognized in other comprehensive income/(loss) $ (10) $ 1 $ (12) $ (21) Amounts not yet reflected in net periodic benefit cost and included in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss), before tax Unrecognized losses $ 185 $ 113 $ 132 $ 430 90 Year Ended December 31, 2016 The United (IN MILLIONS) Netherlands States Other Total Change in projected benefit obligation Benefit obligation at beginning of period $ 639 $ 334 $ 616 $ 1,589 Service cost 5 — 9 14 Interest cost 11 13 16 40 Plan participants’ contributions 1 — 1 2 Actuarial losses 67 10 83 160 Benefits paid (30 ) (13 ) (17 ) (60 ) Expenses paid (1 ) — (2 ) (3 ) Premiums paid — — (1 ) (1 ) Curtailments — — (5 ) (5 ) Settlements — — (8 ) (8 ) Effect of foreign currency translation (23 ) — (63 ) (86 ) Benefit obligation at end of period 669 344 629 1,642 Change in plan assets Fair value of plan assets at beginning of period 622 231 531 1,384 Actual return on plan assets 42 14 40 96 Employer contributions 7 1 14 22 Plan participants’ contributions 1 — 1 2 Benefits paid (30 ) (13 ) (17 ) (60 ) Expenses paid (1 ) — (2 ) (3 ) Premiums paid — — (1 ) (1 ) Settlements — — (8 ) (8 ) Insurance 4 — — 4 Effect of foreign currency translation (20 ) — (51 ) (71 ) Fair value of plan assets at end of period 625 233 507 1,365 Funded status $ (44 ) $ (111 ) $ (122 ) $ (277 ) Amounts recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheets Pension assets included in other non-current assets — — 21 21 Current liabilities — — (2 ) (2 ) Accrued benefit liability included in other non-current liabilities (44 ) (111 ) (141 ) (296 ) Net amount recognized $ (44 ) $ (111 ) $ (122 ) $ (277 ) Amounts recognized in Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss), before tax Net loss $ 39 $ 13 $ 50 $ 102 Settlement loss — — (2 ) (2 ) Amortization of net loss (5 ) (6 ) (4 ) (15 ) Total recognized in other comprehensive income/(loss) $ 34 $ 7 $ 44 $ 85 Amounts not yet reflected in net periodic benefit cost and included in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss), before tax Unrecognized losses $ 195 $ 112 $ 144 $ 451 The total accumulated benefit obligation and minimum liability changes for the Pension Plans were as follows: Year Ended Year Ended Year Ended December 31, December 31, December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Accumulated benefit obligation.
$ 1,750 $ 1,622 $ 1,548 91 Pension Plans with Accumulated Benefit Obligation in Excess of Plan Assets at December 31, 2017 The United (IN MILLIONS) Netherlands States Other Total Projected benefit obligation $ 80 $ 370 $ 560 $ 1,010 Accumulated benefit obligation 80 370 542 992 Fair value of plan assets 76 260 440 776 Pension Plans with Projected Benefit Obligation in Excess of Plan Assets at December 31, 2017 The United (IN MILLIONS) Netherlands States Other Total Projected benefit obligation $ 724 $ 370 $ 560 $ 1,654 Accumulated benefit obligation 721 370 541 1,632 Fair value of plan assets 718 260 440 1,418 Pension Plans with Accumulated Benefit Obligation in Excess of Plan Assets at December 31, 2016 The United (IN MILLIONS) Netherlands States Other Total Projected benefit obligation $ 669 $ 344 $ 528 $ 1,541 Accumulated benefit obligation 668 344 511 1,523 Fair value of plan assets 625 233 386 1,244 Pension Plans with Projected Benefit Obligation in Excess of Plan Assets at December 31, 2016 The United (IN MILLIONS) Netherlands States Other Total Projected benefit obligation $ 669 $ 344 $ 528 $ 1,541 Accumulated benefit obligation 668 344 511 1,523 Fair value of plan assets 625 233 386 1,244 92 Net periodic benefit cost for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively, includes the following components: Net Periodic Pension Costs The United (IN MILLIONS) Netherlands States Other Total Year ended December 31, 2017 Service cost $ 5 $ — $ 8 $ 13 Interest cost 9 12 13 34 Expected return on plan assets (24 ) (17 ) (22 ) (63 ) Settlement loss recognized — — 1 1 Amortization of prior service costs — — (1 ) (1 ) Amortization of net loss 7 6 5 18 Net periodic pension cost $ (3 ) 1 4 2 Year ended December 31, 2016 Service cost $ 5 $ — $ 9 $ 14 Interest cost 11 13 16 40 Expected return on plan assets (26 ) (18 ) (25 ) (69 ) Curtailment gain recognized — — (1 ) (1 ) Settlement loss recognized — — 2 2 Amortization of net loss 5 6 4 15 Net periodic pension cost $ (5 ) 1 5 1 Year ended December 31, 2015 Service cost $ 4 $ — $ 13 $ 17 Interest cost 14 16 20 50 Expected return on plan assets (30 ) (21 ) (31 ) (82 ) Settlement loss recognized — 14 1 15 Amortization of prior service costs — — (1 ) (1 ) Amortization of net loss 8 7 8 23 Net periodic pension cost $ (4 ) $ 16 $ 10 $ 22 The settlement loss of $1 million in 2017 resulted primarily from settling benefit liabilities in Canada and Switzerland.
The settlement loss of $2 million in 2016 resulted primarily from settling certain retiree liabilities in Germany.
The deferred loss included as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) that is expected to be recognized as a component of net periodic benefit cost during 2017 is as follows: The Netherlands United States Other Total Net actuarial loss $ (6 ) $ (9 ) $ (9 ) $ (24 ) Actuarial gains and losses are amortized over the average remaining service lives for plans with active participants, and over the average remaining lives for legacy plans with no active participants.
The weighted average assumptions underlying the pension computations were as follows: Year Ended December 31, 2017 2016 2015 NL US Other NL US Other NL US Other Pension benefit obligation: —discount rate 1.9% 3.7% 2.3% 1.8% 4.4% 2.3% 2.4% 4.6% 3.2% —rate of compensation increase 1.8% — 1.1% 1.8% — 1.1% 1.8% — 2.5% Net periodic pension costs: —discount rate 1.8% 4.4% 2.3% 2.4% 4.6% 3.2% 2.0% 4.3% 3.0% —rate of compensation increase 3.8% — 1.1% 1.8% — 2.5% 2.3% — 2.8% —expected long-term return on plan assets 3.8% 7.0% 4.4% 4.2% 7.3% 5.3% 5.2% 7.5% 6.2% 93 The assumptions for the expected return on plan assets for the Pension Plans were based on a review of the historical returns of the asset classes in which the assets of the Pension Plans are invested and long-term economic forecast for the type of investments held by the plans.
The historical returns on these asset classes were weighted based on the expected long-term allocation of the assets of the Pension Plans.
Nielsen’s pension plans’ weighted average asset allocations by asset category are as follows: The United Netherlands States Other Total At December 31, 2017 Equity securities 27 % 55 % 45 % 37 % Fixed income securities 56 44 31 47 Other 17 1 24 16 Total 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % At December 31, 2016 Equity securities 25 % 55 % 34 % 34 % Fixed income securities 57 44 37 47 Other 18 1 29 19 Total 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % No Nielsen shares are held by the Pension Plans.
Nielsen’s primary objective with regard to the investment of the Pension Plans’ assets is to ensure that in each individual plan, sufficient funds are available to satisfy future benefit obligations.
For this purpose, asset and liability management studies are made periodically at each pension fund.
For each of the Pension Plans, an appropriate mix is determined on the basis of the outcome of these studies, taking into account the national rules and regulations.
The overall target asset allocation among all plans for 2017 was 36% equity securities and 49% long-term interest-earning investments (debt or fixed income securities), and 15% other investments.
Equity securities primarily include investments in U.S. and non U.S. companies.
Fixed income securities include corporate bonds of companies from diversified industries and mortgage-backed securities.
Insurance contracts are categorized as level 3 and are valued based on contractual terms.
Assets at fair value (See Note 7 – “Fair Value Measurements” for additional information on fair value measurement and the underlying fair value hierarchy) as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 are as follows: Our fair value hierarchy shown below excludes investments using the NAV per share practical expedient.
Application of the NAV per share practical expedient coincided with the change in investment management for one of the Company’s Pension Plans during 2016.
(IN MILLIONS) December 31, 2017 December 31, 2016 Asset Category Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Cash and equivalents $ 8 $ — $ — $ 8 $ 19 $ — $ — $ 19 Equity securities – U.S. 60 12 — 72 53 11 — 64 Equity securities – Global.
40 270 — 310 32 222 — 254 Equity securities – non-U.S. 8 94 — 102 6 83 — 89 Real estate — — 47 47 — — 38 38 Corporate bonds 142 243 — 385 127 249 — 376 Debt issued by national, state or local government 39 191 — 230 36 145 — 181 Other — 2 149 151 — 2 129 131 Total assets at fair value, excluding NAV per share practical expedient at December 31, 2017 $ 297 $ 812 $ 196 $ 1,305 $ 273 $ 712 $ 167 $ 1,152 94 The following presents our total fair value of plan assets including the NAV per share practical expedient: (IN MILLIONS) December 31, 2017 December 31, 2016 Fair value of investments, excluding NAV per share practical expedient.
$ 1,305 $ 1,152 Fair value of investments, using NAV per share practical expedient Asset Category Cash $ 7 $ 4 Equity securities – U.S. 26 26 Equity securities – Global.
32 29 Corporate debt securities or bonds.
7 19 Debt issued by national, state or local government 8 2 Liability driven investments 88 71 Real estate 7 7 Private equity and hedge funds 60 54 Insurance and other 19 1 Total assets at fair value including NAV per share practical expedient at December 31, 2017 $ 1,559 $ 1,365 The following is a summary of changes in the fair value of the Pension Plans’ Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016: (IN MILLIONS) Real Estate Other Total Balance, end of year December 31, 2015 $ 33 $ 130 $ 163 Actual return on plan assets: (Sales)/investments 7 — 7 Unrealized gains — 10 10 Effect of foreign currency translation (2 ) (11 ) (13 ) Balance, end of year December 31, 2016 $ 38 $ 129 $ 167 Actual return on plan assets: (Sales)/Investments 5 — 5 Unrealized gains — 3 3 Effect of foreign currency translation 4 17 21 Balance, end of year December 31, 2017 $ 47 $ 149 $ 196 Real estate investment valuations require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted market prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the long-term nature of such assets.
These assets are initially valued at cost and are reviewed periodically utilizing available and relevant market data to determine if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted.
The valuation methodology is applied consistently from period to period.
Other types of investments categorized as Level 3 are primarily insurance contracts and are valued based on contractual terms.
In 2016, the Company adopted ASU No.
2015-07, Disclosures for Investments in Certain Entities That Calculate Net Asset Value per Share (or Its Equivalent), which removed the requirement to categorize within the fair value hierarchy, investments for which fair value is measured using the net asset value per share practical expedient.
The adoption of this ASU did not impact the 2015 presentation.
Contributions to the Pension Plans in 2018 are expected to be approximately $3 million for the Netherlands plan, $9 million for the U.S. plan and $15 million for other plans.
95 Estimated future benefit payments are as follows: The United (IN MILLIONS) Netherlands States Other Total For the years ending December 31, 2018 $ 32 $ 15 $ 20 $ 67 2019 32 15 19 66 2020 32 16 21 69 2021 32 17 21 70 2022 32 17 23 72 2023-2027 158 98 139 395 Defined Contribution Plans Nielsen also offers defined contribution plans to certain participants, primarily in the United States.
Nielsen’s expense related to these plans was $53 million, $49 million and $47 million for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
In the United States, Nielsen contributes cash to each employee’s account in an amount up to 3% of compensation (subject to IRS limitations).
No contributions are made in shares of the Company’s common stock.
10.
Long-term Debt and Other Financing Arrangements Unless otherwise stated, interest rates are as of December 31, 2017.
December 31, 2017 December 31, 2016 Weighted Weighted Interest Carrying Fair Interest Carrying Fair (IN MILLIONS) Rate Amount Value Rate Amount Value $2,080 million Senior secured term loan (LIBOR based variable rate of 3.43%) due 2019 $ 1,392 $ 1,397 $ 1,768 $ 1,785 $1,900 million Senior secured term loan (LIBOR based variable rate of 3.15%) due 2023 — — 1,892 1,922 $2,250 million Senior secured term loan (LIBOR based variable rate of 3.43%) due 2023 2,232 2,247 — — €380 million Senior secured term loan (Euro LIBOR based variable rate of 2.10%) due 2021 450 452 399 402 Total senior secured credit facilities (with weighted-average interest rate) 3.39 % 4,074 4,096 2.95 % 4,059 4,109 $800 million 4.50% senior debenture loan due 2020 795 809 794 813 $625 million 5.50% senior debenture loan due 2021 620 643 618 649 $2,300 million 5.00% senior debenture loan due 2022 2,288 2,362 2,285 2,340 $500 million 5.00% senior debenture loan due 2025 496 518 — — Total debenture loans (with weighted-average interest rate) 5.22 % 4,199 4,332 5.22 % 3,697 3,802 Other loans 1 1 7 7 Total long-term debt 4.32 % 8,274 8,429 4.04 % 7,763 7,918 Capital lease and other financing obligations 167 158 Bank overdrafts 5 Total debt and other financing arrangements 8,441 7,926 Less: Current portion of long-term debt, capital lease and other financing obligations and other short-term borrowings 84 188 Non-current portion of long-term debt and capital lease and other financing obligations $ 8,357 $ 7,738 The fair value of the Company’s long-term debt instruments was based on the yield on public debt where available or current borrowing rates available for financings with similar terms and maturities and such fair value measurements are considered Level 1 or Level 2 in nature, respectively.
96 The carrying value of Nielsen’s long-term debt are denominated in the following currencies: December 31, December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 U.S.
Dollars $ 7,824 $ 7,364 Euro 450 399 $ 8,274 $ 7,763 Annual maturities of Nielsen’s long-term debt are as follows: (IN MILLIONS) 2018 $ 28 2019 $ 1,400 2020 $ 818 2021 $ 1,078 2022 $ 2,326 Thereafter $ 2,624 $ 8,274 Senior Secured Credit Facilities Term Loan Facilities In October 2016, we entered into a second amendment to our Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, and as subsequently amended, the (“Existing Credit Agreement”).
The Existing Credit Agreement provides for term loan facilities as shown in the table above.
In April 2017, we entered into a third amendment to our Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (as amended prior to April 2017, the “Existing Credit Agreement,” and as amended in April 2017 by the third amendment, the “Amended Credit Agreement”), providing for a new class of Class B-4 Term Loans in an aggregate principal amount of $2.25 billion, the proceeds of which were used to replace or refinance the entire outstanding principal of existing Class B-3 Term Loans and a portion of existing Class A Term Loans.
The Class B-4 Term Loans will mature in full on October 4, 2023, and are required to be repaid in equal quarterly installments in an aggregate annual amount equal to 1.00% of the original principal amount of the Class B-4 Term Loans, with the balance payable on October 4, 2023.
The Class B-4 Term Loans bear interest equal to, at the election of us (i) a base rate or LIBOR rate, plus (ii) an applicable margin, which is equal to 2.00% (in the case of LIBOR loans) or 1.00% (in the case of base rate loans).
The Amended Credit Agreement contains the same affirmative and negative covenants as those of the Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement prior to the 2016 amendments.
Obligations under the Amended Credit Agreement are guaranteed by TNC B.V., substantially all of the wholly-owned U.S. subsidiaries of TNC B.V. and certain of the non-U.S. wholly-owned subsidiaries of TNC B.V., and are secured by substantially all of the existing and future property and assets of the U.S. subsidiaries of TNC B.V. and by a pledge of substantially all of the capital stock of the guarantors, the capital stock of substantially all of the U.S. subsidiaries of TNC B.V., and up to 65% of the capital stock of certain of the non-U.S. subsidiaries of TNC B.V.
Under a separate security agreement, substantially all of the assets of TNC B.V. are pledged as collateral for amounts outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement.
97 Covenants The Amended Credit Agreement contains a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict, subject to certain exceptions, the ability of Nielsen Holding and Finance B.V. and its restricted subsidiaries (which together constitute most of Nielsen’s subsidiaries) to incur additional indebtedness or guarantees, incur liens and engage in sale and leaseback transactions, make certain loans and investments, declare dividends, make payments or redeem or repurchase capital stock, engage in certain mergers, acquisitions and other business combinations, prepay, redeem or purchase certain indebtedness, amend or otherwise alter terms of certain indebtedness, sell certain assets, transact with affiliates, enter into agreements limiting subsidiary distributions and alter the business they conduct.
These entities are restricted, subject to certain exceptions, in their ability to transfer their net assets to us.
Such restricted net assets amounted to approximately $4.3 billion at December 31, 2017.
In addition, these entities are subject to a total leverage covenant.
The leverage ratio requires that Nielsen not permit the ratio of total net debt (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) at the end of any calendar quarter to Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) for the four quarters then ended to exceed a specified threshold.
The maximum permitted ratio is 5.50 to 1.00.
Neither Nielsen nor TNC B.V. is currently bound by any financial or negative covenants contained in the Amended Credit Agreement.
The Amended Credit Agreement also contains certain customary affirmative covenants and events of default.
Certain significant financial covenants are described further below.
Failure to comply with this financial covenant would result in an event of default under Nielsen’s Amended Credit Agreement unless waived by certain of Nielsen’s term lenders and the Company’s revolving lenders.
An event of default under Nielsen’s Amended Credit Agreement can result in the acceleration of Nielsen’s indebtedness under the facilities, which in turn would result in an event of default and possible acceleration of indebtedness under the agreements governing Nielsen’s debt securities as well.
As Nielsen’s failure to comply with the financial covenant described above can cause the Company to go into default under the agreements governing Nielsen’s indebtedness, management believes that Nielsen’s Amended Credit Agreement and this covenant are material to Nielsen.
As of December 31, 2017, Nielsen was in full compliance with the financial covenant described above.
Pursuant to Nielsen’s Amended Credit Agreement, the Company is subject to making mandatory prepayments on the term loans within Nielsen’s Amended Credit Agreement to the extent in any full calendar year Nielsen generate Excess Cash Flow (“ECF”), as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement.
The percentage of ECF that must be applied as a repayment is a function of several factors, including Nielsen’s ratio of total net debt to Covenant EBITDA, as well other adjustments, including any voluntary term loan repayments made in the course of the calendar year.
To the extent any mandatory repayment is required pursuant to this ECF clause; such payment must generally occur on or around the time of the delivery of the annual consolidated financial statements to the lenders.
At December 31, 2017, Nielsen’s ratio of total net debt to Covenant EBITDA was less than 5.00 to 1.00 and therefore no mandatory repayment was required.
Nielsen’s next ECF measurement date will occur upon completion of the 2017 results, and although Nielsen do not expect to be required to issue any mandatory repayments in 2018 or beyond, it is uncertain at this time if any such payments will be required in future periods.
Revolving Credit Facility The Amended Credit Agreement also contains a senior secured revolving credit facility under which Nielsen Finance LLC, TNC (US) Holdings, Inc., and Nielsen Holding and Finance B.V. can borrow revolving loans.
The revolving credit facility can also be used for letters of credit, guarantees and swingline loans.
The existing revolving credit facility has commitments of $575 million with a final maturity of April 2019.
The senior secured revolving credit facility is provided under the Amended Credit Agreement and so contains covenants and restrictions as noted under the “Term loan facilities” section above.
Obligations under the revolving credit facility are guaranteed by the same entities that guarantee obligations under the Amended Credit Agreement and Senior Secured Loan Agreement.
As of December 31, 2017, Nielsen had zero borrowings outstanding and outstanding letters of credit of $13 million.
As of December 31, 2016, Nielsen had zero borrowings outstanding and outstanding letters of credit of $6 million.
As of December 31, 2017, Nielsen had $562 million available for borrowing under the revolving credit facility.
Debenture Loans The indentures governing the Senior Notes limit the majority of Nielsen’s subsidiaries’ ability to incur additional indebtedness, pay dividends or make other distributions or repurchase its capital stock, make certain investments, enter into certain types of transactions with affiliates, use assets as security in other transactions and sell certain assets or merge with or into other companies subject to certain exceptions.
Upon a change in control, Nielsen is required to make an offer to redeem all of the Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to the 101% of the aggregate accreted principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The Senior Notes are jointly and severally guaranteed by Nielsen, substantially all of the wholly owned U.S. subsidiaries of Nielsen, and certain of the non-U.S. wholly-owned subsidiaries of Nielsen.
98 In January 2017, Nielsen completed the issuance of $500 million aggregate principal amount of 5.0% Senior Notes due 2025 at par, with cash proceeds of approximately $495 million, net of fees and expenses.
In February 2015, Nielsen completed the issuance of $750 million aggregate principal amount of its 5.0% Senior Notes due 2022.
The notes are traded interchangeably with the $750 million and the $800 million aggregate principal amount of 5.00% Senior Notes due 2022 issued in April 2014 and July 2014, respectively.
The proceeds from the issuances have been used to make repurchases of Nielsen’s outstanding common stock from time to time, in the open market or otherwise, pursuant to Nielsen’s existing share repurchase program, to reduce outstanding amounts under its revolving credit facility, to pay related fees and expenses, and for general corporate purposes.
Other Transactions Effective July 1, 2010, the Company designated its Euro denominated variable rate senior secured term loans as non-derivative hedges of its net investment in a European subsidiary.
Gains or losses attributable to fluctuations in the Euro as compared to the U.S. Dollar associated with this debenture were recorded to the cumulative translation adjustment within stockholders’ equity, net of income tax.
Debt-Issuance Costs The costs related to the issuance of debt are presented as a deduction from the corresponding debt liability and amortized to interest expense using the effective interest method over the life of the related debt.
Capital Lease and Other Obligations Nielsen finances certain computer equipment, software, buildings and automobiles under capital leases and related transactions.
These arrangements do not include terms of renewal, purchase options, or escalation clauses.
Assets under capital lease are recorded within property, plant and equipment.
See Note 6 – “Property, Plant and Equipment.” Future minimum capital lease payments under non-cancelable capital leases at December 31, 2017 are as follows: (IN MILLIONS) 2018 $ 58 2019 49 2020 35 2021 21 2022 13 Thereafter 20 Total 196 Less: amount representing interest 29 Present value of minimum lease payments $ 167 Current portion $ 49 Total non-current portion 118 Present value of minimum lease payments $ 167 Capital leases and other financing transactions have effective interest rates primarily ranging from 4.5% to 10%.
Interest expense recorded related to capital leases and other financing transactions during the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 was $12 million, $11 million and $8 million, respectively.
Nielsen recognizes rental income from non-cancelable subleases.
The total aggregate future rental income proceeds to be received under the non-cancelable subleases are $3 million.
99 11.
Stockholders’ Equity Common stock activity is as follows: Year Ended December 31, 2017 2016 2015 Actual number of shares of common stock outstanding Beginning of period 357,465,614 362,338,369 372,757,598 Shares of common stock issued through business combinations — — 52,698 Shares of common stock issued through compensation plans 1,578,917 3,482,699 4,107,501 Employee benefit trust activity 269,284 (280,339 ) — Repurchases of common stock (3,368,839 ) (8,075,115 ) (14,579,428 ) End of period 355,944,976 357,465,614 362,338,369 On January 31, 2013, the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board”) adopted a cash dividend policy to pay quarterly cash dividends on its outstanding common stock.
The following table represents the cash dividends declared by the Board and paid for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2017, respectively.
Declaration Date Record Date Payment Date Dividend Per Share February 18, 2016 March 3, 2016 March 17, 2016 $ 0.28 April 19, 2016 June 2, 2016 June 16, 2016 $ 0.31 July 21, 2016 August 25, 2016 September 8, 2016 $ 0.31 October 20, 2016 November 22, 2016 December 6, 2016 $ 0.31 February 16, 2017 March 2, 2017 March 16, 2017 $ 0.31 April 24, 2017 June 2, 2017 June 16, 2017 $ 0.34 July 20, 2017 August 24, 2017 September 7, 2017 $ 0.34 October 19, 2017 November 21, 2017 December 5, 2017 $ 0.34 The dividend policy and the payment of future cash dividends are subject to the discretion of the Company’s Board of Directors.
Nielsen’s Board approved a share repurchase program, as included in the below table, for up to $2 billion in the aggregate of our outstanding common stock.
The primary purposes of the program are to return value to shareholders and to mitigate dilution associated with our equity compensation plans.
Board Approval Share Repurchase Authorization ($ in millions) July 25, 2013 $ 500 October 23, 2014 $ 1,000 December 11, 2015 $ 500 Total Share Repurchase Authorization $ 2,000 Repurchases under these plans will be made in accordance with applicable securities laws from time to time in the open market or otherwise depending on our evaluation of market conditions and other factors.
This program has been executed within the limitations of the authority granted by Nielsen’s shareholders.
As of December 31, 2017, there have been 37,206,365 shares of our common stock purchased at an average price of $45.74 per share (total consideration of approximately $1,702 million) under this program.
100 The activity for the year ended December 31, 2017 consisted of open market share repurchases and is summarized in the following table: Total Number of Shares Purchased as Dollar Value of Shares Total Number Average Part of Publicly that may yet be of Shares Price Paid Announced Plans Purchased under the Period Purchased per Share or Programs Plans or Programs As of December 31, 2016 33,837,526 $ 46.16 33,837,526 $ 437,970,016 2017 Activity January 1- 31 — $ — — $ 437,970,016 February 1- 28 564,623 $ 45.30 564,623 $ 412,392,848 March 1- 31 365,228 $ 45.15 365,228 $ 395,903,537 April 1-30 — $ — — $ 395,903,537 May 1-31 1,020,212 $ 40.65 1,020,212 $ 354,426,944 June 1-30 — $ — — $ 354,426,944 July 1-31 — $ — — $ 354,426,944 August 1-31 698,062 $ 41.77 698,062 $ 325,268,111 September 1-30 102,461 $ 39.25 102,461 $ 321,246,116 October 1-31 — $ — — $ 321,246,116 November 1-30 221,845 $ 36.26 221,845 $ 313,201,667 December 1-31 396,408 $ 38.05 396,408 $ 298,118,746 Total 37,206,365 $ 45.74 37,206,365 12.
Stock-Based Compensation Nielsen measures the cost of all stock-based payments, including stock options, at fair value on the grant date and recognizes such costs within the consolidated statements of operations; however, no expense is recognized for stock-based payments that do not ultimately vest.
Nielsen recognizes the expense of its options that cliff vest using the straight-line method.
For those that vest over time, an accelerated graded vesting is used.
The Company recorded $45 million, $51 million and $48 million of expense associated with stock-based compensation for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
The tax benefit related to the stock compensation expense was $13 million for each of the respective periods.
Nielsen has an equity-based, management compensation plan (“Equity Participation Plan” or “EPP”) to align compensation for certain key executives with the performance of the Company.
Under this plan, certain of the Company’s executives may be granted stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock and dividend equivalent rights in the shares of the Company or purchase its shares.
In connection with the completion of Nielsen’s initial public offering of common stock on January 31, 2011 (and further amended), the Company implemented the Nielsen 2010 Stock Incentive Plan (the “Stock Incentive Plan”) and suspended further grants under the EPP.
The Stock Incentive Plan is the source of new equity-based awards permitting the Company to grant to its key employees, directors and other service providers the following types of awards: incentive stock options, non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units and other awards valued in whole or in part by reference to shares of Nielsen’s common stock and performance-based awards denominated in shares or cash.
Under the Stock Incentive Plan, Nielsen granted 1,000 and 1,643,144 time-based stock options to purchase shares during the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
As of December 31, 2017, the total number of shares authorized for award of options or other equity-based awards was 44,095,000 under the Stock Incentive Plan.
The 2017 time-based awards become exercisable over a four-year vesting period at a rate of 6.25% per quarter, and are tied to the executives’ continuing employment.
The 2016 and 2015 time-based awards become exercisable over a four-year vesting period at a rate of 25 % per year on the anniversary day of the award, and are tied to the executives’ continuing employment.
The fair values of the granted time-based awards granted during 2017, 2016 and 2015 were estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model with the expected volatility based on the Company’s historical volatility.
101 The following assumptions were used during 2017, 2016 and 2015: Year Ended December 31, 2017 2016 2015 Expected life (years) 4.50 4.50-5.25 4.50-5.25 Risk-free interest rate 2.02 % 1.19-1.92 % 1.27-1.58 % Expected dividend yield 3.76 % 2.29- 2.90 % 2.18- 2.45 % Expected volatility 22.01 % 20.02-23.44 % 23.44-23.70 % Weighted average volatility 22.01 % 20.89 % 23.56 % Nielsen’s stock option plan activity is summarized below: Number of Options(Time Based andPerformance Based) Weighted-AverageExercise Price Weighted-AverageRemainingContractualTerm inYears AggregateIntrinsicValue inMillions Stock Option Plan activity Outstanding at December 31, 2014 14,527,460 28.80 4.29 $ 231 Granted 1,609,170 48.24 Forfeited (1,808,315 ) (30.59 ) Exercised (3,779,137 ) (21.84 ) Outstanding at December 31, 2015 10,549,178 $ 33.96 4.16 $ 136 Granted 1,643,144 53.99 Forfeited (577,618 ) (33.51 ) Exercised (3,456,536 ) (28.85 ) Outstanding at December 31, 2016 8,158,168 $ 40.19 4.43 $ 43 Granted 1,000 36.17 Forfeited (996,015 ) (47.59 ) Exercised (1,293,850 ) (28.13 ) Outstanding at December 31, 2017 5,869,303 $ 41.58 3.52 $ 13 Exercisable at December 31, 2017 4,094,127 $ 37.91 2.80 $ 13 As of December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, the weighted-average grant date fair value of the options granted was $4.70, $7.78 and $8.13, respectively, and the aggregate fair value of options vested was $9 million, $12 million and $21 million, respectively.
At December 31, 2017, there is approximately $5 million of unearned stock-based compensation related to stock options which the Company expects to record as stock-based compensation expense over the next four years.
The compensation expense related to the time-based awards is amortized over the term of the award using the graded vesting method.
The intrinsic value of the options exercised during the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 was $17 million, $77 million and $94 million, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2017, cash proceeds from the exercise of options was $32 million.
102 Activity of Nielsen’s restricted stock units (RSUs) that are ultimately payable in shares of common stock granted under the Stock Incentive Plan is summarized below: Number of RSUs Weighted-AverageGrant Date Fair Value RSU activity Nonvested at December 31, 2014 1,308,002 $ 35.90 Granted 851,088 47.29 Forfeited (200,217 ) 37.20 Vested (452,106 ) 34.19 Nonvested at December 31, 2015 1,506,767 $ 42.48 Granted 512,676 53.94 Forfeited (104,822 ) 43.26 Vested (558,228 ) 39.21 Nonvested at December 31, 2016 1,356,393 $ 47.69 Granted 1,574,973 36.23 Forfeited (339,292 ) 46.09 Vested (503,086 ) 44.62 Nonvested at December 31, 2017 2,088,988 $ 40.36 With the exception of a limited group of senior executives, the 2017 awards vest at a rate of 6.25% per quarter over the four year period.
The 2017 awards for the limited group of senior executives will vest at a rate of 25% per year over four years on the anniversary date of the award.
The 2016 and 2015 awards will vest at a rate of 25% per year over four years on the anniversary date of the award.
On January 31, 2017, Nielsen completed the acquisition of Gracenote and concurrently provided 31,381 replacement restricted stock units under Nielsen’s existing Stock Incentive Plan.
The exchange was accounted for as a modification in accordance with ASC 718.
The aggregate fair value of the replacement awards granted on January 31, 2017 was $2 million, of which $1 million was attributed to post merger service and $1 million was included in purchase price consideration.
As of December 31, 2017, approximately $49 million of unearned stock-based compensation related to unvested RSUs (net of estimated forfeitures) is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 3.4 years.
During the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, the Company granted 348,885, 381,576 and 333,700
performance restricted stock units, respectively, representing the target number of performance restricted stock subject to the award.
The weighted average grant date fair value of the awards in 2017, 2016 and 2015 were $37.88, $45.37 and $50.50 per share.
For the performance restricted stock units granted in 2017, the total number of performance restricted stock units to be earned is subject to achievement of cumulative performance goals for the three year period ending December 31, 2019.
For the performance restricted stock units granted in 2016, the total number of performance restricted stock units to be earned is subject to achievement of cumulative performance goals for the three year period ending December 31, 2018.
For the performance restricted stock units granted in 2015, the total number of performance restricted stock units to be earned is subject to achievement of cumulative performance goals for the three year period ending December 31, 2017.
Forty percent of the target award will be determined based on the Company’s relative total shareholder return and sixty percent of the target award will be determined based on free cash flow achievements.
The maximum payout is 200% of target.
The fair value of the target award related to free cash flow was the fair value on the date of the grant, and the fair value of the target awards related to relative shareholder return was based on the Monte Carlo model.
As of December 31, 2017, there is approximately $13 million of unearned stock-based compensation related to unvested performance restricted stock (net of estimated forfeitures).
The compensation expense is amortized over the term of the award, which is 3 years after the grant date.
During the year ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, the Company granted zero, 66,581 and 96,282 bonus restricted share units, respectively, in lieu of a portion of the cash bonus due to certain executives.
The awards vest at 50% on the first and second anniversary day of the award.
The weighted average grant date fair value of the awards in 2017, 2016 and 2015 was $0, $47.85 and $45.28 per share.
As of December 31, 2017, there is approximately $0 million of unearned stock-based compensation expense related to unvested bonus restricted share units (net of estimated forfeitures).
The compensation expense is amortized over the requisite service periods of two and three years.
103 In 2016, the Company implemented the Nielsen Holdings plc 2016 Employee Share Purchase Plan (the ESPP) and 2,000,000 shares were authorized for issuance under the ESPP.
There were 159,279 shares issued under the ESPP in 2017.
13.
Income Taxes Nielsen provides for income taxes utilizing the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes.
Under this method, deferred income taxes are recorded to reflect the tax consequences in future years of differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their financial reporting amounts at each balance sheet date, based on enacted tax laws and statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income.
If it is determined that it is more likely than not that future tax benefits associated with a deferred tax asset will not be realized, a valuation allowance is provided.
The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in the tax rates is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations as an adjustment to income tax expense in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company records a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
Such tax positions are, based solely on their technical merits, more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities and reflect the largest amount of benefit, determined on a cumulative probability basis that is more likely than not to be realized upon settlement with the applicable taxing authority with full knowledge of all relevant information.
The Company recognizes interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “TCJ Act”) was signed into law.
The TCJ Act significantly changes U.S. federal corporate income tax laws by, among other things, reducing the U.S. corporate income tax rate to 21% starting in 2018 and creating a territorial-style tax system with a one-time mandatory tax on previously deferred foreign earnings of US subsidiaries.
The Company is subject to the provisions of the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") ASC 740-10, Income Taxes, which requires that the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates be recognized in the period the tax rate change was enacted.
However, in December of 2017, the SEC staff issued SAB 118 which provides that companies that have not completed their accounting for the effects of the TCJ Act but can determine a reasonable estimate of those effects should include a provisional amount based on their reasonable estimate in their financial statements.
The Company, as explained below, has made reasonable estimates in order to account for the effects of the TCJ Act.
As a result of the enactment of the TCJ Act, the Company has recorded a provisional net expense of $104 million during the fourth quarter of 2017.
This amount, which is included in the Provision for Income Taxes in the Consolidated Statement of Operations, consists of two provisional components: (i) a $167 million expense, including $116 million of withholding and other taxes relating to the cost of the one-time mandatory tax on previously deferred earnings of certain non-U.S. subsidiaries that are owned either wholly or partially by a U.S. subsidiary of the Company, and (ii) a $63 million net benefit resulting from the remeasurement of Nielsen’s deferred tax balances including the impact of any associated valuation allowances in the U.S. based on the new lower corporate income tax rate.
Although the $104 million net expense represents what Nielsen believes is a reasonable estimate of the impact of the income tax effects of the TCJ Act on Nielsen’s Consolidated Financial Statements as of December 31, 2017, it should be considered provisional.
In light of the complexity of the TCJ Act, Nielsen anticipates additional interpretive guidance from the U.S. Treasury.
In addition, once the Company finalizes certain tax positions when it files its 2017 U.S. tax return it will be able to conclude whether any further adjustments are required to its deferred tax balances in the U.S., as well as to the total liability associated with the one-time mandatory tax.
Any adjustments to these provisional amounts will be reported as a component of the Provision for Income Taxes during the reporting period in which any such adjustments are determined, all of which will be reported no later than the fourth quarter of 2018.
The components of income before income taxes and equity in net income of affiliates, were: Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 UK $ 27 $ (3 ) $ 16 Non-UK 801 819 945 Income before income taxes and equity in net income of affiliates $ 828 $ 816 $ 961 The above amounts for UK and non-UK activities were determined based on the location of the taxing authorities.
104 The provision for income taxes attributable to the income before income taxes and equity in net income of affiliates consisted of: Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Current: UK $ — $ — $ (6 ) Non-UK .
226 221 176 226 221 170 Deferred: UK (5 ) 1 (1 ) Non-UK 167 87 214 162 88 213 Total $ 388 $ 309 $ 383 The Company’s provision for income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 was different from the amount computed by applying the statutory UK federal income tax rates to the underlying income before income taxes and equity in net income of affiliates as a result of the following: Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Income before income taxes and equity in net income of affiliates $ 828 $ 816 $ 961 UK statutory tax rate 19.25 % 20.00 % 20.25 % Provision for income taxes at the UK statutory rate $ 159 $ 163 $ 195 Tax impact on distributions from foreign subsidiaries 8 24 (5 ) Effect of operations in non-UK jurisdictions 35 71 74 Tax impact of global licensing arrangements 66 74 80 U.S. state and local taxation 23 30 40 Withholding and other taxation 39 39 37 Effect of global financing activities (68 ) (71 ) (82 ) Changes in estimates for uncertain tax positions 40 (9 ) 8 Changes in valuation allowances (8 ) (29 ) 17 Effect of change in deferred tax rates 7 1 3 Tax impact due to US Tax Reform 104 — — Stock-based compensation — (19 ) — Other, net (17 ) 35 16 Total provision for income taxes $ 388 $ 309 $ 383 Effective tax rate 46.9 % 37.9 % 39.8 % 105 The components of current and non-current deferred income tax assets/(liabilities) were: (IN MILLIONS) December 31, 2017 December 31, 2016 Deferred tax assets (on balance): Net operating loss carryforwards $ 204 $ 179 Interest expense limitation 367 654 Employee benefits 63 91 Tax credit carryforwards 72 130 Stock-based payments 18 32 Accrued expenses 53 57 Financial instruments 1 (14 ) Deferred revenue/costs 5 — Other assets 28 29 811 1,158 Valuation allowances (466 ) (112 ) Deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances 345 1,046 Deferred tax liabilities (on balance): Intangible assets (1,173 ) (1,591 ) Fixed asset depreciation — (42 ) Computer software (149 ) (301 ) Unremitted earnings (172 ) — Unrealized gain on investments (50 ) (73 ) Other liabilities (66 ) (87 ) (1,610 ) (2,094 ) Net deferred tax liability $ (1,265 ) $ (1,048 ) Realization of deferred tax assets is based, in part, on Nielsen’s judgment and various factors including reversal of deferred tax liabilities, Nielsen’s ability to generate future taxable income in jurisdictions where such assets have arisen and potential tax planning strategies.
Valuation allowances are recorded in order to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized in the future.
At December 31, 2017 and 2016 the Company had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $947 million and $788 million, respectively, which began to expire in 2018.
In addition, the Company had tax credit carryforwards of approximately $72 million and $130 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively, which began to expire in 2018.
In certain jurisdictions, the Company has operating losses and other tax attributes that, due to the uncertainty of achieving sufficient profits to utilize these operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards, the Company currently believes it is more likely than not that a portion of these losses will not be realized.
Therefore, the Company has a valuation allowance of approximately $104 million and $112 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively, related to net operating loss carryforwards, tax credit carryforwards and deferred tax assets related to other temporary differences.
The Company also has a valuation allowance of $362 million related to its interest expense limitation carryforward due to the uncertainty created by the TCJ Act.
Other than as described above, the Company generally does not provide for taxes related to its undistributed earnings and the excess of the book value of its investment in non-U.S. subsidiaries over the corresponding tax basis (“basis differences”) because such earnings and basis differences totaling $3.4 billion would either not be taxable when remitted or are considered to be indefinitely reinvested.
At December 31, 2017 and 2016, the Company had gross uncertain tax positions of $452 million and $432 million, respectively.
The Company has also accrued interest and penalties associated with these unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 of $53 million and $33 million, respectively.
Estimated interest and penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes is classified as a component of benefit (provision) for income taxes in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
It is reasonably possible that a reduction in a range of $5 million to $18 million of uncertain tax positions may occur within the next twelve months as a result of projected resolutions of worldwide tax disputes and expirations of statute of limitations in various jurisdictions.
106 A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of gross uncertain tax positions is as follows: (IN MILLIONS) December 31, 2017 December 31, 2016 December 31, 2015 Balance as of the beginning of period $ 432 $ 461 $ 452 Additions for current year tax positions 11 15 24 Additions for tax positions of prior years 15 7 14 Reductions for lapses of statute of limitations (2 ) (6 ) (15 ) Reductions for tax positions of prior years (4 ) (45 ) (14 ) Balance as of the end of the period $ 452 $ 432 $ 461 If the balance of the Company’s uncertain tax positions is sustained by the taxing authorities in the Company’s favor, the reversal of the entire balance would reduce the Company’s effective tax rate in future periods.
The Company files numerous consolidated and separate income tax returns in the U.S. Federal jurisdiction and in many state and foreign jurisdictions.
With few exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to U.S. Federal income tax examinations for 2006 and prior periods.
In addition, the Company has subsidiaries in various states, provinces and countries that are currently under audit for years ranging from 2003 through 2016.
14.
Investments in Affiliates and Related Party Transactions Related Party Transactions with Affiliates As of December 31, 2017 and 2016, Nielsen had investments in affiliates of $15 million and $16 million, respectively.
Obligations between Nielsen and its affiliates are regularly settled in cash in the ordinary course of business.
Nielsen had net receivables from its affiliates of approximately $3 million and $2 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
On October 1, 2015, Nielsen acquired an additional 13.5% of NCS, a joint venture between Nielsen and Catalina for $40 million, net of cash acquired.
The joint venture was historically accounted for under the equity method of accounting.
As part of this transaction we gained control of NCS, as such accounted for it as a step-acquisition and calculated the fair value of the investment immediately before the acquisition to be $161 million.
As a result, during the fourth quarter of 2015, the Company recorded a $158 million gain on the investment in NCS to other income/(expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations.
Commencing October 1, 2015, NCS was included as a consolidated subsidiary within Nielsen’s consolidated financial statements.
15.
Commitments and Contingencies Leases and Other Contractual Arrangements In October 2017, Nielsen amended and restated in its entirety, its Amended and Restated Master Services Agreement, dated as of October 1, 2007, with Tata America International Corporation and Tata Consultancy Services Limited (jointly, “TCS”) (as amended prior to the Second Amendment and Restatement, the “Prior Agreement”) by entering into a Second Amended and Restated Master Services Agreement (the “Agreement”), dated as of October 1, 2017 and effective as of January 1, 2017 (the “Effective Date”), with TCS.
The term of the Agreement has been extended for an additional five years, so as to expire on December 31, 2025, with three one-year renewal options granted to Nielsen.
Nielsen has committed to purchase services from TCS from the Effective Date through the remaining term of the Agreement (the “Minimum Commitment”) in the amount of $2.25 billion, including a commitment to purchase at least $320 million in services per year from 2017 through 2020, $186 million in services per year from 2021 through 2024, and $139.5 million in services in 2025 (in each of the foregoing cases, the “Annual Commitment”).
Nielsen met the Minimum Commitment in 2017.
In connection with the entry into the Agreement, the parties have agreed to terminate the separate Global Infrastructure Services Agreement between them as of the Effective Date and include the services provided thereunder in one or more Statements of Work (“SOWs”) arising under the Agreement.
TCS’s charges under such SOWs will continue to be credited against the Minimum Commitment and the Annual Commitment.
TCS globally provides Nielsen with professional services relating to information technology (including application development and maintenance), business process outsourcing, client service knowledge process outsourcing, management sciences, analytics, and financial planning.
As Nielsen orders specific services under the Agreement, the parties will execute SOWs describing the specific scope of the services to be performed by TCS.
The amount of the Minimum Commitment and the Annual Commitment may be reduced on the occurrence of certain events, some of which also provide Nielsen with the right to terminate the Agreement or SOWs, as applicable.
107 Nielsen has also entered into operating leases and other contractual obligations to secure real estate facilities, agreements to purchase data processing services and leases of computers and other equipment used in the ordinary course of business and various outsourcing contracts.
These agreements are not unilaterally cancelable by Nielsen, are legally enforceable and specify fixed or minimum amounts or quantities of goods or services at fixed or minimum prices.
The amounts presented below represent the minimum annual payments under Nielsen’s purchase obligations that have initial or remaining non-cancelable terms in excess of one year.
These purchase obligations include data processing, building maintenance, equipment purchasing, photocopiers, land and mobile telephone service, computer software and hardware maintenance, and outsourcing.
For the Years Ending December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Thereafter Total Operating leases $ 99 $ 79 $ 62 $ 46 $ 35 $ 132 $ 453 Other contractual obligations(a) 589 472 440 206 201 582 2,490 Total $ 688 $ 551 $ 502 $ 252 $ 236 $ 714 $ 2,943 (a) Other contractual obligations represent obligations under agreement, which are not unilaterally cancelable by Nielsen, are legally enforceable and specify fixed or minimum amounts or quantities of goods or services at fixed or minimum prices.
Nielsen generally requires purchase orders for vendor and third party spending.
The amounts presented above represent the minimum future annual services covered by purchase obligations including data processing, building maintenance, equipment purchasing, photocopiers, land and mobile telephone service, computer software and hardware maintenance, and outsourcing.
Nielsen’s remaining commitments as of December 31, 2017, under the outsourced services agreement with TCS have been included above based on the Annual Commitment minimum required payments.
Total expenses incurred under operating leases were $96 million, $79 million and $76 million for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Nielsen recognized rental income received under subleases of $6 million, $8 million and $9 million for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
At December 31, 2017, Nielsen had aggregate future proceeds to be received under non-cancelable subleases of $12 million.
Nielsen also has minimum commitments under non-cancelable capital leases.
See Note 10 “Long-term Debt and Other Financing Arrangements” for further discussion.
Guarantees and Other Contingent Commitments At December 31, 2017, Nielsen was committed under the following significant guarantee arrangements: Sub-lease guarantees Nielsen provides sub-lease guarantees in accordance with certain agreements pursuant to which Nielsen guarantees all rental payments upon default of rental payment by the sub-lessee.
To date, the Company has not been required to perform under such arrangements, does not anticipate making any significant payments related to such guarantees and, accordingly, no amounts have been recorded.
Letters of credit Letters of credit issued and outstanding amount to $13 million and $6 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
Legal Proceedings and Contingencies Nielsen is subject to litigation and other claims in the ordinary course of business, some of which include claims for substantial sums.
Accruals have been recorded when the outcome is probable and can be reasonably estimated.
While the ultimate results of claims and litigation cannot be determined, the Company does expect that the ultimate disposition of these matters will not have a material adverse effect on its operations or financial condition.
However, depending on the amount and the timing, an unfavorable resolution of some or all of these matters could materially affect the Company’s future results of operations or cash flows in a particular period.
108 16.
Segments The Company aligns its operating segments in order to conform to management’s internal reporting structure, which is reflective of service offerings by industry.
Management aggregates such operating segments into two reporting segments: what consumers buy, consisting principally of market research information and analytical services, and what consumers watch and listen to, consisting principally of television, radio, online and mobile audience and advertising measurement services and corresponding analytics.
Corporate consists principally of unallocated items such as certain facilities and infrastructure costs as well as intersegment eliminations.
Certain corporate costs, other than those described in Item 7 “Management Discussion and Analysis,” including those related to selling, finance, legal, human resources, and information technology systems, are considered operating costs and are allocated to the Company’s segments based on either the actual amount of costs incurred or on a basis consistent with the operations of the underlying segment.
Information with respect to the operations of each of Nielsen’s business segments is set forth below based on the nature of the services offered and geographic areas of operations.
109 Business Segment Information Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Revenues Buy $ 3,231 $ 3,322 $ 3,345 Watch 3,341 2,987 2,827 Total $ 6,572 $ 6,309 $ 6,172 Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Business segment income/(loss)(1) Buy $ 587 $ 623 $ 624 Watch 1,485 1,352 1,269 Corporate and eliminations (37 ) (37 ) (35 ) Total $ 2,035 $ 1,938 $ 1,858 Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Depreciation and amortization Buy $ 210 $ 212 $ 207 Watch 425 387 363 Corporate and eliminations 5 4 4 Total $ 640 $ 603 $ 574 Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Restructuring charges Buy $ 42 $ 61 $ 32 Watch 15 18 14 Corporate and eliminations 23 26 5 Total $ 80 $ 105 $ 51 Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Stock-based compensation expense Buy $ 13 $ 16 $ 15 Watch 12 10 8 Corporate and eliminations 20 25 25 Total $ 45 $ 51 $ 48 Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Other items(2) Buy $ — $ 3 $ 1 Watch — 2 4 Corporate and eliminations 45 31 87 Total $ 45 $ 36 $ 92 Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Operating income/(loss) Buy $ 322 $ 331 $ 369 Watch 1,033 935 880 Corporate and eliminations (130 ) (123 ) (156 ) Total $ 1,225 $ 1,143 $ 1,093 110 (IN MILLIONS) December 31, 2017 December 31, 2016 Total assets Buy $ 6,862 $ 6,697 Watch 9,911 8,905 Corporate and eliminations 93 128 Total $ 16,866 $ 15,730 (1) The Company’s chief operating decision-maker uses business segment income/(loss) to measure performance from period to period both at the consolidated level as well as within its operating segments.
(2) For the year ended December 31, 2017, other items primarily consist of transaction related costs and business optimization costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2016, other items primarily consist of business optimization costs.
Year ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Capital expenditures Buy $ 272 $ 196 $ 159 Watch 211 227 244 Corporate and eliminations 6 10 5 Total $ 489 $ 433 $ 408 111 Geographic Segment Information Operating Long- Income/ lived (IN MILLIONS) Revenues(1) (Loss) Assets(2) 2017 United States $ 3,730 $ 754 $ 11,404 North and South America, excluding the United States 595 164 957 United Kingdom 194 (20 ) 259 Other Europe, Middle East & Africa 1,188 159 1,038 Asia Pacific 865 168 396 Total $ 6,572 $ 1,225 $ 14,054 Operating Long- Income/ lived (IN MILLIONS) Revenues(1) (Loss) Assets(2) 2016 United States $ 3,626 $ 738 $ 10,573 North and South America, excluding the United States 605 180 902 United Kingdom 198 (22 ) 215 Other Europe, Middle East & Africa 1,089 127 1,032 Asia Pacific 791 120 330 Total $ 6,309 $ 1,143 $ 13,052 Operating Income/ (IN MILLIONS) Revenues(1) (Loss) 2015 United States $ 3,606 $ 761 North and South America, excluding the United States 567 131 United Kingdom 226 (6 ) Other Europe, Middle East & Africa 1,030 120 Asia Pacific 743 87 Total $ 6,172 $ 1,093 (1) Revenues are attributed to geographic areas based on the location of customers.
(2) Long-lived assets include property, plant and equipment, goodwill and other intangible assets.
17.
Additional Financial Information Accounts payable and other current liabilities December 31, December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 Trade payables $ 296 $ 238 Personnel costs 273 248 Current portion of restructuring liabilities 43 67 Data and professional services 221 192 Interest payable 61 51 Other current liabilities(1) 247 216 Total accounts payable and other current liabilities $ 1,141 $ 1,012 (1) Other includes multiple items, none of which is individually significant.
112 18.
Guarantor Financial Information The following supplemental financial information is being provided for purposes of compliance with reporting covenants contained in certain debt obligations of Nielsen and its subsidiaries.
The financial information sets forth for Nielsen, its subsidiaries that have issued certain debt securities (the “Issuers”) and its guarantor and non-guarantor subsidiaries, the consolidating balance sheet as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 and consolidating statements of operations and cash flows for the periods ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015.
During the year ended December 31, 2017, the Company restructured certain legal entities and therefore the Company adjusted prior periods to reflect the current year structure.
The issued debt securities are jointly and severally guaranteed on a full and unconditional basis by Nielsen and subject to certain exceptions, each of the direct and indirect 100% owned subsidiaries of Nielsen, in each case to the extent that such entities provide a guarantee under the senior secured credit facilities.
The issuers are also 100% owned indirect subsidiaries of Nielsen: Nielsen Finance LLC and Nielsen Finance Co. for certain series of debt obligations, and The Nielsen Company (Luxembourg) S.ar.l., for the other series of debt obligations.
Each issuer is a guarantor of the debt obligations not issued by it.
Nielsen is a holding company and does not have any material assets or operations other than ownership of the capital stock of its direct and indirect subsidiaries.
All of Nielsen’s operations are conducted through its subsidiaries, and, therefore, Nielsen is expected to continue to be dependent upon the cash flows of its subsidiaries to meet its obligations.
The senior secured credit facilities contain certain limitations on the ability of Nielsen to receive the cash flows of its subsidiaries.
While all subsidiary guarantees of the issued debt securities are full and unconditional, these guarantees contain customary release provisions including when (i) the subsidiary is sold or sells all of its assets, (ii) the subsidiary is declared “unrestricted” for covenant purposes, (iii) the subsidiary’s guarantee under the senior secured credit facilities is released and (iv) the requirements for discharge of the indenture have been satisfied.
113 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income For the year ended December 31, 2017 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Elimination Consolidated Revenues $ — $ — $ 3,608 $ 2,964 $ — $ 6,572 Cost of revenues, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below — — 1,419 1,346 — 2,765 Selling, general and administrative expenses, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 4 — 922 936 — 1,862 Depreciation and amortization — — 504 136 — 640 Restructuring charges — — 44 36 — 80 Operating (loss)/income (4 ) — 719 510 — 1,225 Interest income 1 839 37 4 (877 ) 4 Interest expense — (353 ) (857 ) (41 ) 877 (374 ) Foreign currency exchange transaction losses, net — — (4 ) (6 ) — (10 ) Other (expense)/income, net — (4 ) 152 (165 ) — (17 ) (Loss)/income before income taxes and equity in net income/(loss) of subsidiaries and affiliates (3 ) 482 47 302 — 828 Provision for income taxes (1 ) (146 ) (167 ) (74 ) — (388 ) Equity in net income of subsidiaries 433 193 554 — (1,180 ) — Equity in net (loss)/income of affiliates — — (1 ) 1 — — Net income 429 529 433 229 (1,180 ) 440 Less net income attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — 11 — 11 Net income attributable to controlling interest 429 529 433 218 (1,180 ) 429 Total other comprehensive income/(loss) 271 (21 ) 271 308 (556 ) 273 Total other comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — 2 — 2 Total other comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to controlling interests 271 (21 ) 271 306 (556 ) 271 Total comprehensive income 700 508 704 537 (1,736 ) 713 Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — 13 — 13 Total comprehensive income attributable to controlling interest $ 700 $ 508 $ 704 $ 524 $ (1,736 ) $ 700 114 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income For the year ended December 31, 2016 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Elimination Consolidated Revenues $ — $ — $ 3,557 $ 2,752 $ — $ 6,309 Cost of revenues, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below — — 1,317 1,290 — 2,607 Selling, general and administrative expenses, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 2 — 960 889 — 1,851 Depreciation and amortization — — 486 117 — 603 Restructuring charges — — 69 36 — 105 Operating (loss)/income (2 ) — 725 420 — 1,143 Interest income — 869 38 5 (908 ) 4 Interest expense (3 ) (310 ) (889 ) (39 ) 908 (333 ) Foreign currency exchange transaction gains/(losses), net — — 2 (8 ) — (6 ) Other (expense)/income net — (7 ) 159 (144 ) — 8 (Loss)/income before income taxes and equity in net (loss)/income of affiliates (5 ) 552 35 234 — 816 Provision for income taxes — (135 ) (115 ) (59 ) — (309 ) Equity in net income of subsidiaries 507 185 588 — (1,280 ) — Equity in net (loss)/income of affiliates — — (1 ) 1 — — Net income 502 602 507 176 (1,280 ) 507 Less net income attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — 5 — 5 Net income attributable to controlling interest 502 602 507 171 (1,280 ) 502 Total other comprehensive (loss)/income (152 ) 10 (152 ) (184 ) 321 (157 ) Total other comprehensive loss attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — (5 ) — (5 ) Total other comprehensive loss attributable to controlling interests (152 ) 10 (152 ) (179 ) 321 (152 ) Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 350 $ 612 $ 355 $ (8 ) $ (959 ) $ 350 115 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income For the year ended December 31, 2015 (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Non-Guarantor Elimination Consolidated Revenues $ — $ — $ 3,585 $ 2,587 $ — $ 6,172 Cost of revenues, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below — — 1,279 1,260 — 2,539 Selling, general and administrative expenses, exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below 4 — 1,048 863 — 1,915 Depreciation and amortization — — 465 109 — 574 Restructuring charges — — 32 19 — 51 Operating (loss)/income (4 ) — 761 336 — 1,093 Interest income — 864 37 5 (902 ) 4 Interest expense — (291 ) (881 ) (41 ) 902 (311 ) Foreign currency exchange transaction losses, net — — (10 ) (21 ) — (31 ) Other income/(expense), net — — 252 (46 ) — 206 (Loss)/income before income taxes and equity in net loss of affiliates (4 ) 573 159 233 — 961 Provision for income taxes (1 ) (127 ) (175 ) (80 ) — (383 ) Equity in net income of subsidiaries 575 201 593 — (1,369 ) — Equity in net loss of affiliates — — (2 ) (1 ) — (3 ) Net income 570 647 575 152 (1,369 ) 575 Less: net income attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — 5 — 5 Net income attributable to controlling interests 570 647 575 147 (1,369 ) 570 Total other comprehensive (loss)/income (282 ) 21 (282 ) (282 ) 535 (290 ) Total other comprehensive loss attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — (8 ) — (8 ) Total other comprehensive (loss)/income attributable to controlling interests (282 ) 21 (282 ) (274 ) 535 (282 ) Total comprehensive income/(loss) 288 668 293 (130 ) (834 ) 285 Total comprehensive loss attributable to noncontrolling interests — — — (3 ) — (3 ) Total comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to controlling interests $ 288 $ 668 $ 293 $ (127 ) $ (834 ) $ 288 116 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Balance Sheet December 31, 2017 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Elimination Consolidated Assets: Current assets Cash and cash equivalents $ 2 $ 1 $ 69 $ 584 $ — $ 656 Trade and other receivables, net — — 464 816 — 1,280 Prepaid expenses and other current assets — — 211 135 — 346 Intercompany receivables 4 1,187 325 155 (1,671 ) — Total current assets 6 1,188 1,069 1,690 (1,671 ) 2,282 Non-current assets - Property, plant and equipment, net — — 309 173 — 482 Goodwill — — 6,100 2,395 — 8,495 Other intangible assets, net — — 4,545 532 — 5,077 Deferred tax assets 1 — — 169 — 170 Other non-current assets — 17 263 80 — 360 Equity investment in subsidiaries 4,213 1,210 4,583 — (10,006 ) — Intercompany loans 25 8,608 424 140 (9,197 ) — Total assets $ 4,245 $ 11,023 $ 17,293 $ 5,179 $ (20,874 ) $ 16,866 Liabilities and equity: Current liabilities Accounts payable and other current liabilities $ — $ 61 $ 560 $ 520 $ — $ 1,141 Deferred revenues — — 231 130 — 361 Income tax liabilities — — 62 49 — 111 Current portion of long-term debt, capital lease obligations and short-term borrowings — 35 44 5 — 84 Intercompany payables — 2 1,345 324 (1,671 ) — Total current liabilities — 98 2,242 1,028 (1,671 ) 1,697 Non-current liabilities — Long-term debt and capital lease obligations — 8,237 101 19 — 8,357 Deferred tax liabilities — 71 1,296 68 — 1,435 Intercompany loans — 62 8,774 361 (9,197 ) — Other non-current liabilities — — 667 267 — 934 Total liabilities — 8,468 13,080 1,743 (10,868 ) 12,423 Total stockholders’ equity 4,245 2,555 4,213 3,238 (10,006 ) 4,245 Noncontrolling interests — — — 198 — 198 Total equity 4,245 2,555 4,213 3,436 (10,006 ) 4,443 Total liabilities and equity $ 4,245 $ 11,023 $ 17,293 $ 5,179 $ (20,874 ) $ 16,866 117 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Balance Sheet December 31, 2016 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Elimination Consolidated Assets: Current assets Cash and cash equivalents $ 5 $ 1 $ 215 $ 533 $ — $ 754 Trade and other receivables, net 2 — 472 697 — 1,171 Prepaid expenses and other current assets — — 185 112 — 297 Intercompany receivables — 862 312 167 (1,341 ) — Total current assets 7 863 1,184 1,509 (1,341 ) 2,222 Non-current assets Property, plant and equipment, net — — 306 165 — 471 Goodwill — — 5,728 2,117 — 7,845 Other intangible assets, net — — 4,248 488 — 4,736 Deferred tax assets 2 — (1 ) 126 — 127 Other non-current assets — 3 245 81 — 329 Equity investment in subsidiaries 4,117 1,079 4,229 — (9,425 ) — Intercompany loans 25 11,533 3,332 150 (15,040 ) — Total assets $ 4,151 $ 13,478 $ 19,271 $ 4,636 $ (25,806 ) $ 15,730 Liabilities and equity: Current liabilities Accounts payable and other current liabilities $ — $ 52 $ 477 $ 483 $ — $ 1,012 Deferred revenues — — 171 126 — 297 Income tax liabilities — 2 36 59 — 97 Current portion of long-term debt, capital lease obligations and short-term borrowings — 145 35 8 — 188 Intercompany payables 47 2 988 304 (1,341 ) — Total current liabilities 47 201 1,707 980 (1,341 ) 1,594 Non-current liabilities Long-term debt and capital lease obligations — 7,611 106 21 — 7,738 Deferred tax liabilities — 71 1,027 77 — 1,175 Intercompany loans — 2,985 11,708 347 (15,040 ) — Other non-current liabilities 2 4 608 316 — 930 Total liabilities 49 10,872 15,156 1,741 (16,381 ) 11,437 Total stockholders’ equity 4,102 2,606 4,117 2,702 (9,425 ) 4,102 Noncontrolling interests — — (2 ) 193 — 191 Total equity 4,102 2,606 4,115 2,895 (9,425 ) 4,293 Total liabilities and equity $ 4,151 $ 13,478 $ 19,271 $ 4,636 $ (25,806 ) $ 15,730 118 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows For the year ended December 31, 2017 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Consolidated Net cash (used in)/provided by operating activities $ (1 ) $ 171 $ 789 $ 351 $ 1,310 Investing activities: — Acquisition of subsidiaries and affiliates, net of cash acquired — — (755 ) (23 ) (778 ) Proceeds from the sale of subsidiaries and affiliates 1 1 2 Additions to property, plant and equipment and other assets — — (63 ) (56 ) (119 ) Additions to intangible assets — — (307 ) (63 ) (370 ) Proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment and other assets — — 29 13 42 Other investing activities — — (11 ) (2 ) (13 ) Net cash used in investing activities — — (1,106 ) (130 ) (1,236 ) Financing activities: Repayments of debt — (2,295 ) — (1 ) (2,296 ) Proceeds from the issuance of debt, net of issuance costs — 2,744 1 — 2,745 Decrease in short term borrowings — - — — (5 ) (5 ) Cash dividends paid to stockholders (474 ) — — — (474 ) Repurchase of common stock (140 ) — — — (140 ) Activity under stock plans 32 — (11 ) — 21 Proceeds from employee stock purchase plan 6 — — — 6 Capital leases — — (51 ) (4 ) (55 ) Settlement of intercompany and other financing activities 574 (620 ) 236 (207 ) (17 ) Net cash (used in)/provided by financing activities (2 ) (171 ) 175 (217 ) (215 ) Effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents — — (4 ) 47 43 Net (decrease)/increase in cash and cash equivalents (3 ) — (146 ) 51 (98 ) Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 5 1 215 533 754 Cash and cash equivalents at end of period $ 2 $ 1 $ 69 $ 584 $ 656 119 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows For the year ended December 31, 2016 Non- (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Guarantor Consolidated Net cash (used in)/provided by operating activities $ (5 ) $ 278 $ 671 $ 352 $ 1,296 Investing activities: Acquisition of subsidiaries and affiliates, net of cash acquired — — (242 ) (43 ) (285 ) Proceeds from the sale of subsidiaries and affiliates — — 36 (2 ) 34 Additions to property, plant and equipment and other assets — — (53 ) (56 ) (109 ) Additions to intangible assets — — (273 ) (51 ) (324 ) Proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment and other assets — — 31 11 42 Other investing activities — — (1 ) 1 — Net cash used in investing activities — — (502 ) (140 ) (642 ) Financing activities: Net payments under revolving credit facility — — (164 ) — (164 ) Repayments of debt — (1,765 ) — — (1,765 ) Proceeds from the issuance of debt, net of issuance costs — 2,502 — — 2,502 Increase in short term borrowings — — — 4 4 Cash dividends paid to stockholders (434 ) — — — (434 ) Repurchase of common stock (418 ) — — — (418 ) Activity under stock plans 103 — (22 ) — 81 Other financing activities 758 (1,014 ) 222 (20 ) (54 ) Net cash provided by/(used in) financing activities 9 (277 ) 36 (16 ) (248 ) Effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents — — 3 (12 ) (9 ) Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 4 1 208 184 397 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 1 — 7 349 357 Cash and cash equivalents at end of period $ 5 $ 1 $ 215 $ 533 $ 754 120 Nielsen Holdings plc Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows For the year ended December 31, 2015 (IN MILLIONS) Parent Issuers Guarantor Non-Guarantor Consolidated Net cash provided by operating activities $ — $ 255 $ 667 $ 287 $ 1,209 Investing activities: Acquisition of subsidiaries and affiliates, net of cash acquired — — (246 ) — (246 ) Proceeds from sale of subsidiaries and affiliates, net — — 30 — 30 Additions to property, plant and equipment and other assets — — (82 ) (52 ) (134 ) Additions to intangible assets — — (237 ) (37 ) (274 ) Proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment — — — 7 7 Other investing activities — — 36 — 36 Net cash used in investing activities — — (499 ) (82 ) (581 ) Financing activities: Net borrowings under revolving credit facility — — (116 ) — (116 ) Proceeds from issuances of debt, net of issuance costs — 746 — — 746 Repayments of debt — (98 ) — — (98 ) Cash dividends paid to stockholders (408 ) — — — (408 ) Repurchase of common stock (667 ) — — — (667 ) Proceeds from exercise of stock options 79 — (7 ) — 72 Other financing activities 948 (904 ) 16 (81 ) (21 ) Net cash used in financing activities (48 ) (256 ) (107 ) (81 ) (492 ) Effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents — — (3 ) (49 ) (52 ) Net (decrease)/increase in cash and cash equivalents (48 ) (1 ) 58 75 84 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 49 1 (51 ) 274 273 Cash and cash equivalents at end of period $ 1 $ — $ 7 $ 349 $ 357 19.
Quarterly Financial Data (unaudited) First Second Third Fourth (IN MILLIONS, EXCEPT PER SHARE DATA) Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter 2017 Revenues $ 1,526 $ 1,644 $ 1,641 $ 1,761 Operating income $ 207 $ 324 $ 337 $ 357 Income before income taxes and equity in net income of affiliates $ 116 $ 224 $ 242 $ 246 Net income attributable to Nielsen stockholders $ 71 $ 131 $ 146 $ 81 Net income per share of common stock, basic Net income attributable to Nielsen stockholders $ 0.20 $ 0.37 $ 0.41 $ 0.23 Net income per share of common stock, diluted Net income attributable to Nielsen stockholders $ 0.20 $ 0.37 $ 0.41 $ 0.23 First Second Third Fourth (IN MILLIONS, EXCEPT PER SHARE DATA) Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter 2016 Revenues $ 1,487 $ 1,596 $ 1,570 $ 1,656 Operating income $ 224 $ 282 $ 296 $ 341 Income before income taxes and equity in net income of affiliates $ 145 $ 196 $ 214 $ 261 Net income attributable to Nielsen stockholders $ 100 $ 113 $ 130 $ 159 Net income per share of common stock, basic Net income attributable to Nielsen stockholders $ 0.28 $ 0.31 $ 0.36 $ 0.44 Net income per share of common stock, diluted 
Net income attributable to Nielsen stockholders $ 0.27 $ 0.31 $ 0.36 $ 0.44 121 Schedule I—Condensed Financial Information of Registrant Nielsen Holdings plc Parent Company Only Statements of Operations Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Selling, general and administrative expenses $ 4 $ 2 $ 4 Operating loss (4 ) (2 ) (4 ) Interest income 1 — — Interest expense — (3 ) — Loss before income taxes and equity in net income of subsidiaries (3 ) (5 ) (4 ) Provision for income taxes (1 ) — (1 ) Equity in net income of subsidiaries 433 507 575 Net income $ 429 $ 502 $ 570 Nielsen Holdings plc Parent Company Only Balance Sheets December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 Assets: Current assets Cash and cash equivalents $ 2 $ 5 Amounts receivable from subsidiary 4 2 Total current assets 6 7 Investment in subsidiaries 4,213 4,117 Loans outstanding from subsidiary 25 25 Other non-current assets 1 2 Total assets $ 4,245 $ 4,151 Liabilities and equity: Current liabilities Accounts payable and other current liabilities — — Intercompany payables — 47 Total current liabilities — 47 Loans outstanding from subsidiary — — Other non-current liabilities — 2 Total liabilities — 49 Total equity 4,245 4,102 Total liabilities and equity $ 4,245 $ 4,151 122 Nielsen Holdings plc Parent Company Only Statements of Cash Flows Year Ended December 31, (IN MILLIONS) 2017 2016 2015 Net cash used in operating activities $ (1 ) $ (5 ) $ — Financing Activities: Cash dividends paid to stockholders (474 ) (434 ) (408 ) Repurchase of common stock (140 ) (418 ) (667 ) Activity under stock plans 32 103 79 Proceeds from employee stock purchase plan 6 — — Other financing activities 574 758 948 Net cash provided by/(used in) financing activities (2 ) 9 (48 ) Net (decrease)/increase in cash and cash equivalents (3 ) 4 (48 ) Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period 5 1 49 Cash and cash equivalents, end of period $ 2 $ 5 $ 1 The notes to the consolidated financial statements of Nielsen Holdings plc (the “Company”) are an integral part of these nonconsolidated financial statements.
Notes to Schedule I 1.
Basis of Presentation The Company has accounted for the earnings of its subsidiaries under the equity method in these financial statements.
2.
Commitments and Contingencies The debenture loans are jointly and severally guaranteed on an unconditional basis by the Company and subject to certain exceptions, each of the direct and indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries of the Company, including VNU Intermediate Holding B.V., Nielsen Holding and Finance B.V., VNU International B.V., TNC (US) Holdings, Inc., VNU Marketing Information, Inc. and ACN Holdings, Inc., and the wholly-owned subsidiaries thereof, including the wholly-owned U.S. subsidiaries of ACN Holdings, Inc., in each case to the extent that such entities provide a guarantee under the senior secured credit facilities.
The issuers are Nielsen Finance LLC and Nielsen Finance Co., both wholly-owned subsidiaries of ACN Holdings, Inc. and subsidiary guarantors and The Nielsen Company (Luxembourg) S ar l., a wholly owned subsidiary of Nielsen Holding and Finance B.V.
The historical financial information has been updated to reflect The Nielsen Company (Luxembourg) S.ar.l.
as an issuer.
The Company had no material commitments or contingencies during the reported periods.
3.
Related Party Transactions The Company enters into certain transactions with its subsidiaries through the normal course of operations and periodically settles these transactions in cash.
The Company had a $25 million loan receivable from subsidiaries associated with financing transactions for each of the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016.
123 4.
Common Stock and Related Transactions On January 31, 2013, the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board”) adopted a cash dividend policy to pay quarterly cash dividends on its outstanding common stock.
The following table represents the cash dividends paid for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2017, respectively.
Declaration Date Record Date Payment Date Dividend Per Share February 18, 2016 March 3, 2016 March 17, 2016 $ 0.28 April 19, 2016 June 2, 2016 June 16, 2016 $ 0.31 July 21, 2016 August 25, 2016 September 8, 2016 $ 0.31 October 20, 2016 November 22, 2016 December 6, 2016 $ 0.31 February 16, 2017 March 2, 2017 March 16, 2017 $ 0.31 April 24, 2017 June 2, 2017 June 16, 2017 $ 0.34 July 20, 2017 August 24, 2017 September 7, 2017 $ 0.34 October 19, 2017 November 21, 2017 December 5, 2017 $ 0.34 The dividend policy and payment of future cash dividends are subject to the discretion of the Board.
Nielsen’s Board approved a share repurchase program, as included in the below table, for up to $2 billion of our outstanding common stock.
The primary purpose of the program is to return value to shareholders and to mitigate dilution associated with our equity compensation plans.
Board Approval Share Repurchase Authorization ($ in millions) July 25, 2013 $ 500 October 23, 2014 $ 1,000 December 11, 2015 $ 500 Total Share Repurchase Authorization $ 2,000 Repurchases under these plans will be made in accordance with applicable securities laws from time to time in the open market or otherwise depending on our evaluation of market conditions and other factors.
This program has been executed within the limitations of the authority granted by Nielsen’s shareholders.
As of December 31, 2017, there have been 37,206,365 shares of our common stock purchased at an average price of $45.74 per share (total consideration of approximately $1,702 million) under this program.
Total Number of Shares Purchased as Dollar Value of Shares Total Number Average Part of Publicly that may yet be of Shares Price Paid Announced Plans Purchased under the Period Purchased per Share or Programs Plans or Programs As of December 31, 2016 33,837,526 $ 46.16 33,837,526 $ 437,970,016 2017 Activity January 1- 31 — — — $ 437,970,016 February 1- 28 564,623 $ 45.30 564,623 $ 412,392,848 March 1- 31 365,228 $ 45.15 365,228 $ 395,903,537 April 1-30 — $ — — $ 395,903,537 May 1-31 1,020,212 $ 40.65 1,020,212 $ 354,426,944 June 1-30 — $ — — $ 354,426,944 July 1-31 — $ — — $ 354,426,944 August 1-31 698,062 $ 41.77 698,062 $ 325,268,111 September 1-30 102,461 $ 39.25 102,461 $ 321,246,116 October 1-31 — $ — — $ 321,246,116 November 1-30 221,845 $ 36.26 221,845 $ 313,201,667 December 1-31 396,408 $ 38.05 396,408 $ 298,118,746 Total 37,206,365 $ 45.74 37,206,365 124 Schedule II—Valuation and Qualifying Accounts For the Years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 (IN MILLIONS) BalanceBeginningofPeriod Charges toExpense Deductions Effect ofForeignCurrencyTranslation Balance atEnd ofPeriod Allowance for accounts receivable and sales returns For the year ended December 31, 2015 $ 29 $ 6 $ (7 ) $ (2 ) $ 26 For the year ended December 31, 2016 $ 26 $ 4 $ (4 ) $ (1 ) $ 25 For the year ended December 31, 2017 $ 25 $ 6 $ (3 ) $ 1 $ 29 (IN MILLIONS) BalanceBeginning ofPeriod Charges/(Credits) toExpense ChargedtoOtherAccounts Effect ofForeignCurrencyTranslation Balance atEnd ofPeriod Valuation allowance for deferred taxes For the year ended December 31, 2015 $ 147 $ 17 $ (8 ) $ (12 ) $ 144 For the year ended December 31, 2016 $ 144 $ (29 ) $ 7 $ (10 ) $ 112 For the year ended December 31, 2017 $ 112 $ 355 $ (8 ) $ 7 $ 466 125 Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure None.
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures (a) Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures The Company maintains disclosure controls and procedures that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in the reports that the Company files or submits to the SEC under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to the Company’s management, including its principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
In designing and evaluating the disclosure controls and procedures, management recognized that any controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives, as the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures are designed to do.
The Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have evaluated the effectiveness of the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures (as such term is defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act) as of December 31, 2017 (the “Evaluation Date”).
Based on such evaluation and subject to the foregoing, such officers have concluded that, as of the Evaluation Date, the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures are effective at the reasonable assurance level to ensure that information required to be disclosed by the Company in the reports that the Company files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms and to ensure that information required to be disclosed by the Company in the reports that the Company files or submits under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to the Company’s management, including its principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
(b) Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting appears in Part II, Item 8.
“Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this annual report on Form 10-K. (c) Attestation Report of the Registered Public Accounting Firm The Company’s financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K have been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, independent registered public accounting firm.
Ernst & Young LLP has also provided an attestation report on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Their reports appear in Part II,
