Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.The financial and business analysis below provides information which we believe is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
This financial and business analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes.The following discussion and certain other sections of this Report contain statements that reflect our views about our future performance and constitute "forward-looking statements" under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
Forward-looking statements can be identified by words such as "outlook," "believe," "anticipate," "appear," "may," "will," "should," "intend," "plan," "estimate," "expect," "assume," "seek," "forecast," and similar references to future periods.
Our views about future performance involve risks and uncertainties that are difficult to predict and, accordingly, our actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in our forward-looking statements.
We caution you against relying on any of these forward-looking statements.In addition to the various factors included in the "Executive Level Overview," "Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates" and "Outlook for the Company" sections, our future performance may be affected by the levels of residential repair and remodel activity, and to a lesser extent, new home construction, our ability to maintain our strong brands and reputation and to develop innovative products, our ability to maintain our competitive position in our industries, our reliance on key customers, the length and severity of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including its impact on domestic and international economic activity, consumer confidence, our production capabilities, our employees and our supply chain, the cost and availability of materials and the imposition of tariffs, our dependence on third-party suppliers, risks associated with our international operations and global strategies, our ability to achieve the anticipated benefits of our strategic initiatives, our ability to successfully execute our acquisition strategy and integrate businesses that we have and may acquire, our ability to attract, develop and retain talented and diverse personnel, risks associated with our reliance on information systems and technology, and our ability to achieve the anticipated benefits from our investments in new technology.
These and other factors are discussed in detail in Item 1A.
"Risk Factors" of this Report.
Any forward-looking statement made by us speaks only as of the date on which it was made.
Factors or events that could cause our actual results to differ may emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for us to predict all of them.
Unless required by law, we undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.Executive Level OverviewWe design, manufacture and distribute branded home improvement and building products.
These products are sold primarily for repair and remodeling activity and, to a lesser extent, new home construction.
We sell our products through home center retailers, online retailers, wholesalers and distributors, mass merchandisers, hardware stores, direct to the consumer and homebuilders.2020 ResultsNet sales were positively impacted by increased sales volume across our two segments.
Such increases were partially offset by unfavorable net selling prices in our Decorative Architectural Products segment.Our Plumbing Products segment operating profit was positively impacted by cost saving initiatives, including actions taken to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic impact, and higher sales volume.
These positive impacts were partially offset by increased commodity costs, including tariffs, and an increase in other expenses (such as salaries and legal costs).
Our Decorative Architectural Products segment operating profit benefited primarily from higher sales volume mostly due to paints and other coating products, as well as cost savings initiatives, including actions taken to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic impact.
Additionally, operating profit was positively impacted by the non-recurrence of a 2019 non-cash impairment charge related to an other indefinite-lived intangible asset for a trademark associated with lighting products.
These positive impacts were partially offset by unfavorable net selling prices, higher fixed expenses in our lighting business, and an increase in other expenses (such as salaries, legal costs, and advertising).17COVID-19 Impact and ResponseDuring 2020, certain aspects of our businesses were adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Many, but not all, of our businesses remained operating in 2020 because the products we provide are critical to infrastructure sectors and the day-to-day operations of homes and businesses in our communities as defined by applicable local orders.
However, some of our facilities experienced reduced capacity due to social distancing requirements and/or full closures ranging from a few days to 6-8 weeks, and if certain governmental orders are reimposed or if we are required to close a facility for employee safety reasons, we could experience new or extended closures which might adversely impact our ability to produce and distribute our products.
Operational activity that was previously slowed at certain of our facilities, as a result of the pandemic and governmental orders, largely resumed operations at normal capacities by the third quarter of 2020 enabling them to progress on the fulfillment of production backlogs that developed in the first half of the year as well as to meet current consumer demand.
Finally, we may experience supply chain disruptions, particularly disruptions related to our ability to source plumbing, lighting and builders’ hardware products.Given our portfolio of lower ticket, repair and remodel-oriented product and the increased demand for repair and remodel spending, we experienced strong consumer demand in 2020.
These levels of demand may or may not continue and we may experience an adverse impact in our 2021 results due to economic contraction as a result of continued high unemployment levels and remaining or potential renewed shelter-in-place and social distancing orders.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the mitigating measures taken by many countries have adversely impacted and could in the future materially adversely impact the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition.During 2020, we implemented mitigating efforts to manage operating spend and preserve cash and liquidity including the temporary suspension of our share repurchase activity beginning in the second quarter of 2020, which we resumed in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Currently, we have not identified, and will continue to monitor for, any substantive risk attributable to customer credit and have not experienced a significant impact from permanent store closures or retail bankruptcies.We continue to be committed to the safety and well-being of our employees during this time, and, led by our cross-functional Infectious Illness Response Team, we have employed best practices and followed guidance from the World Health Organization and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
We have implemented and are continuing to implement alternative work arrangements to support the health and safety of our employees, including working remotely and avoiding large gatherings.
In addition, we have modified work areas and workstations to provide protective measures for employees, are staggering shifts, requiring the use of face coverings, practicing social distancing and increasing the cleaning of our facilities, and in the event that we learn of an employee testing positive for COVID-19, we are completing contact tracing and requiring impacted employees to self-quarantine.18Critical Accounting Policies and EstimatesOur discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP").
The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect or could have affected the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of any contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
We regularly review our estimates and assumptions, which are based upon historical experience, as well as current economic conditions and various other factors (including the anticipated impact of the COVID-19 pandemic) that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of certain assets and liabilities and related disclosures, and future revenues and expenses, that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions.Note A to the consolidated financial statements includes our accounting policies, estimates and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.We believe that the following critical accounting policies are affected by significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.Revenue Recognition and ReceivablesWe recognize revenue as control of our products is transferred to our customers, which is generally at the time of shipment or upon delivery based on the contractual terms with our customers.
We provide customer programs and incentive offerings, including special pricing and co-operative advertising arrangements, promotions and other volume-based incentives.
These customer programs and incentives are considered variable consideration.
We include in revenue variable consideration only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the variable consideration is resolved.
This determination is made based upon known customer program and incentive offerings at the time of sale, and expected sales volume forecasts as it relates to our volume-based incentives.
This determination is updated each reporting period.
We monitor our exposure for credit losses on customer receivable balances and the credit worthiness of customers on an on-going basis and maintain allowances for doubtful accounts receivable for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments.
Allowances are estimated based upon specific customer balances, where a risk of loss has been identified, and also include a provision for losses based upon historical collection and write-off activity as well as reasonable and supportable forecast information that considers macro-economic factors and industry-specific trends associated with our businesses, among others.
A separate allowance is recorded for customer incentive rebates and is generally based upon sales activity.Goodwill and Other Intangible AssetsWe record the excess of purchase cost over the fair value of net tangible assets of acquired companies as goodwill or other identifiable intangible assets.
In the fourth quarter of each year, or as events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount, we complete the impairment testing of goodwill utilizing a discounted cash flow method.
We selected the discounted cash flow methodology because we believe that it is comparable to what would be used by market participants.
We have defined our reporting units and completed the impairment testing of goodwill at the operating segment level.
19Determining market values using a discounted cash flow method requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including long-term projections of cash flows, market conditions and appropriate discount rates.
Our judgments are based upon historical experience, current market trends, consultations with external valuation specialists and other information.
While we believe that the estimates and assumptions underlying the valuation methodology are reasonable, different estimates and assumptions could result in different outcomes.
In estimating future cash flows, we rely on internally generated five-year forecasts for sales and operating profits, and, currently, a two percent to three percent long-term assumed annual growth rate of cash flows for periods after the five-year forecast.
We generally develop these forecasts based upon, among other things, recent sales data for existing products, planned timing of new product launches, estimated repair and remodel activity and, to a lesser extent, estimated housing starts.
Our assumptions included U.S.
Gross Domestic Product growing at approximately 4.2 percent in 2021 and develop into a relatively stable 2.8 percent each year thereafter, and a eurozone Gross Domestic Product growing at approximately 5.2 percent in 2021 and developing into a relatively stable 2.2 percent per annum over the five-year forecast.We utilize our weighted average cost of capital of approximately 8.0 percent as the basis to determine the discount rate to apply to the estimated future cash flows.
Our weighted average cost of capital in 2020 was consistent with 2019.
In 2020, based upon our assessment of the risks impacting each of our businesses, we applied a risk premium to increase the discount rate to a range of 10.0 percent to 12.0 percent for our reporting units.If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized to the extent that a reporting unit's recorded carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill in that reporting unit.In the fourth quarter of 2020, we estimated that future discounted cash flows projected for all of our reporting units were greater than the carrying values.
Accordingly, we did not recognize any impairment charges for goodwill.
A 10 percent decrease in the estimated fair value of our reporting units would have resulted in a $6 million impairment to one of our reporting units.We review our other indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually, in the fourth quarter, or as events occur or circumstances change that indicate the assets may be impaired without regard to the business unit.
Potential impairment is identified by comparing the fair value of an other indefinite-lived intangible asset to its carrying value.
We utilize a relief-from-royalty model to estimate the fair value of other indefinite-lived intangible assets.
We consider the implications of both external (e.g., market growth, competition and local economic conditions) and internal (e.g., product sales and expected product growth) factors and their potential impact on cash flows related to the intangible asset in both the near- and long-term.
We also consider the profitability of the business, among other factors, to determine the royalty rate for use in the impairment assessment.We utilize our weighted average cost of capital of approximately 8.0 percent as the basis to determine the discount rate to apply to the estimated future cash flows.
In 2020, based upon our assessment of the risks impacting each of our businesses and the nature of the trade name, we applied a risk premium to increase the discount rate to a range of 11.0 percent to 12.5 percent for our other indefinite-lived intangible assets.In the fourth quarter of 2020, we estimated that future discounted cash flows projected for our other indefinite-lived intangible assets were greater than the carrying values.
Accordingly, we did not recognize any impairment charges for other indefinite-lived intangible assets.
A 10 percent decrease in the estimated fair value of our other indefinite-lived intangible assets would have resulted in a $3 million impairment for one of our trade names.Employee Retirement PlansAs of January 1, 2010, substantially all our domestic and foreign qualified and domestic non-qualified defined-benefit pension plans were frozen to future benefit accruals.Accounting for defined-benefit pension plans involves estimating the cost of benefits to be provided in the future, based upon vested years of service, and attributing those costs over the time period each employee works.
We develop our pension costs and obligations from actuarial valuations.
Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions regarding expected return on plan assets, mortality rates and discount rates for obligations and expenses.
We consider current market conditions, including changes in interest rates, in selecting these assumptions.
While we believe that the estimates and assumptions underlying the valuation methodology are reasonable, different estimates and assumptions could result in different reported pension costs and obligations within our consolidated financial statements.20In December 2019, our Board of Directors approved the termination of our qualified domestic defined-benefit pension plans.
As a result of this decision, the projected benefit obligations for these plans were increased to reflect the incremental costs to terminate the plans.
Upon termination in 2021, we expect to recognize from accumulated other comprehensive loss approximately $450 million of pre-tax actuarial losses and approximately $95 million of income tax benefit, which includes approximately $11 million of tax expense from the elimination of a disproportionate tax effect.In December 2020, our discount rate for obligations decreased to a weighted average of 1.7 percent from 2.5 percent.
The discount rate for obligations is based primarily upon the expected duration of each defined-benefit pension plan's liabilities matched to the December 31, 2020 Willis Towers Watson Rate Link Curve.
For our qualified domestic defined-benefit pension plans, the projected benefit obligations include the estimated incremental cost related to the termination.
For these plans, the discount rate was then set equal to the discount rate that results in the same projected benefit obligation resulting from the normal projected benefit obligation calculation plus the estimated incremental cost to terminate.
The discount rates we use for our defined-benefit pension plans ranged from 0.7 percent to 2.1 percent, with the most significant portion of the liabilities having a discount rate for obligations of 1.6 percent or higher.
Due to the anticipated termination of our qualified domestic defined-benefit pension plans and the related plan assets comprised mostly of fixed income and cash, the assumed asset return for these assets was 2.0 percent.The net underfunded amount for our qualified defined-benefit pension plans, which is the difference between the projected benefit obligation and plan assets, increased to $255 million at December 31, 2020 from $254 million at December 31, 2019.
Our projected benefit obligation for our unfunded, non-qualified, defined-benefit pension plans increased to $162 million at December 31, 2020 from $161 million at December 31, 2019.
These unfunded plans are not subject to the funding requirements of the Pension Protection Act of 2006.
In accordance with the Pension Protection Act, the Adjusted Funding Target Attainment Percentage for the various defined-benefit pension plans ranges from 113 percent to 117 percent.The increase in our qualified defined-benefit pension plan projected benefit obligation was primarily impacted by a decrease in the discount rate.
During 2020, we contributed $57 million to our qualified defined-benefit pension plans, and our qualified defined-benefit pension plan assets had a positive return of 9.7 percent.
Refer to Note N to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
We expect pension expense for our qualified defined-benefit pension plans to be $470 million in 2021 compared with $30 million in 2020.
The expected increase in pension expense is due to the anticipated termination of our qualified domestic defined-benefit pension plans and the recognition of losses currently reported in accumulated other comprehensive loss.
If we assumed that the future return on plan assets was 50 basis points lower than the assumed asset return and the discount rate decreased by 50 basis points, the 2021 pension expense would increase by $60 million.
Assuming a 0 percent asset return for our qualified domestic defined-benefit pension plans, projected 2021 total qualified defined-benefit pension plan expenses are expected to be approximately $474 million.
We expect pension expense for our non-qualified defined-benefit pension plans to be $6 million in 2021, compared to $8 million recognized in 2020.Consistent with our plan to terminate the qualified domestic defined-benefit pension plans, we currently anticipate contributing approximately $140 million in 2021.
Refer to Note N to the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding the funding of our plans.Income TaxesDeferred taxes are recognized based on the future tax consequences of differences between the financial statement carrying value of assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis.
The future realization of deferred tax assets depends on the existence of sufficient taxable income in future periods.
Possible sources of taxable income include taxable income in carryback periods, the future reversal of existing taxable temporary differences recorded as a deferred tax liability, tax-planning strategies that generate future income or gains in excess of anticipated losses in the carryforward period and projected future taxable income.If, based upon all available evidence, both positive and negative, it is more likely than not (more than 50 percent likely) such deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is recorded.
Significant weight is given to positive and negative evidence that is objectively verifiable.
A company's three-year cumulative loss position is significant negative evidence in considering whether deferred tax assets are realizable, and the accounting guidance restricts the amount of reliance we can place on projected taxable income to support the recovery of the deferred tax assets.
21We maintain a valuation allowance on certain state and foreign deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020.
Should we determine that we would not be able to realize our remaining deferred tax assets in these jurisdictions in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be recorded in the period such determination is made.
The need to maintain a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets may cause greater volatility in our effective tax rate.Corporate Development StrategyWe expect to maintain a balanced growth strategy pursuing organic growth by maximizing the full potential of our existing businesses and, as appropriate, complementing our existing business with strategic acquisitions.
During 2020, we completed the acquisitions of Kraus, Work Tools and SmarTap and signed an agreement to acquire majority interest in ESS.In addition, we actively manage our portfolio of companies by divesting of those businesses that do not align with our long-term growth strategy.
We will continue to review all of our businesses to determine which businesses, if any, may not align with our long-term growth strategy.Liquidity and Capital Resources Overview of Capital StructureHistorically, we have largely funded our growth through cash provided by our operations, the issuance of notes in the financial markets, bank borrowings and the issuance of our common stock, including issuances for certain mergers and acquisitions.
Maintaining high levels of liquidity and focusing on cash generation are among our financial strategies.
Our capital allocation strategy includes reinvesting in our business, balancing share repurchases with potential acquisitions and maintaining an appropriate dividend.We had cash and cash investments of approximately $1.3 billion at December 31, 2020.
Our cash and cash investments consist of overnight interest bearing money market demand accounts, time deposit accounts, and money market mutual funds containing government securities and treasury obligations.
While we attempt to diversify these investments in a prudent manner to minimize risk, it is possible that future changes in the financial markets could affect the security or availability of these investments.
Of the $1.3 billion and $697 million of cash and cash investments we held at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, $385 million and $297 million, respectively, was held in our foreign subsidiaries.
If these funds were needed for our operations in the U.S., their repatriation into the U.S. would not result in significant additional U.S. income tax or foreign withholding tax, as we have recorded such taxes on substantially all undistributed foreign earnings, except for those that are legally restricted.Our current ratio was 1.8 to 1 at both December 31, 2020 and 2019.Our total debt as a percent of total capitalization was 87 percent and 102 percent at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Refer to Note L to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.Senior IndebtednessOn September 18, 2020, we issued $300 million of 2.0% Notes due October 1, 2030 (the "2030 Notes") and received proceeds of $300 million, net of discount, for the issuance of the 2030 Notes.
Also on September 18, 2020, we issued an incremental $100 million on our existing 4.5% Notes due May 15, 2047 (the "2047 Notes") and received proceeds of $119 million, including a premium, for the issuance of the 2047 Notes.
The incremental $100 million formed a single series with the existing $300 million of 4.5% Notes due May 15, 2047.
The 2030 Notes and 2047 Notes are senior indebtedness and are redeemable at our option at the applicable redemption price.
On September 29, 2020, proceeds from the debt issuances were used to repay and early retire $400 million of our 3.5% Notes due April 1, 2021.
In connection with this early retirement, we incurred a loss on debt extinguishment of $6 million, which was recorded as interest expense in our consolidated statement of operations.On December 19, 2019, we redeemed and retired $201 million of our 7.125% Notes due March 15, 2020.
In connection with this early retirement, we incurred a loss on debt extinguishment of $2 million, which was recorded as interest expense in our consolidated statement of operations.On April 16, 2018, we repaid and retired all of our $114 million, 6.625% Notes on the scheduled repayment date.22Credit Agreement On March 13, 2019, we entered into a credit agreement (the "Credit Agreement") with an aggregate commitment of $1.0 billion and a maturity date of March 13, 2024.
Under the Credit Agreement, at our request and subject to certain conditions, we can increase the aggregate commitment up to an additional $500 million with the current lenders or new lenders.
See Note L to the consolidated financial statements.The Credit Agreement contains financial covenants requiring us to maintain (A) a net leverage ratio, as adjusted for certain items, not exceeding 4.0 to 1.0, and (B) a minimum interest coverage ratio, as adjusted for certain items, not less than 2.5 to 1.0.
We were in compliance with all covenants and no borrowings were outstanding under our Credit Agreement at December 31, 2020.Acquisitions During 2020, we acquired substantially all of the net assets of Kraus and Work Tools, and all of the share capital of SmarTap for a combined $175 million of cash and $5 million of debt.Additionally, we entered into an agreement to acquire a 75.1% equity interest in ESS for approximately €45 million ($55 million) subject to working capital and other adjustments.
A cash payment was made to a third-party notary for $52 million on December 29, 2020 for the acquisition of this equity interest in advance of the transaction closing on January 4, 2021.On March 9, 2018, we acquired substantially all of the net assets of the L.D.
Kichler Co. ("Kichler").
The purchase price, net of $2 million cash acquired, consisted of $549 million paid with cash on hand.Divestitures During 2020, we completed the divestiture of our Cabinetry business for proceeds of $853 million, net of cash disposed.During 2019, we completed the divestitures of our Milgard Windows and Doors business ("Milgard") and our UK Window Group business ("UKWG") for combined proceeds of $722 million.Share RepurchasesIn September 2019, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase, for retirement, of up to $2.0 billion of shares of our common stock in open-market transactions or otherwise.During 2020, we repurchased and retired 18.8 million shares of our common stock (including 0.4 million shares to offset the dilutive impact of restricted stock units granted during the year), for approximately $727 million.
At December 31, 2020, we had $774 million remaining under the 2019 authorization.
Our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase, for retirement, of up to $2.0 billion shares of our common stock in open-market transactions or otherwise, effective February 10, 2021, replacing the 2019 authorization.During 2019, we repurchased and retired 20.1 million shares of our common stock (including 0.6 million shares to offset the dilutive impact of long-term stock awards granted in 2019), for approximately $896 million.During 2018, we repurchased and retired 18.6 million shares of our common stock (including 0.7 million shares to offset the dilutive impact of long-term stock awards granted in 2018) for approximately $654 million.Consistent with past practice and as part of our strategic initiative to drive shareholder value, we anticipate using approximately $800 million of cash for share repurchases (including shares which will be purchased to offset any dilution from restricted stock units granted as part of our compensation programs) in 2021.Dividend to holder of Common SharesIn the third quarter of 2020, we increased our quarterly dividend to $0.14 per common share from $0.135 per common share.
As part of our capital allocation strategy and subject to declaration by our Board of Directors, we intend to increase the annual dividend to $0.94 per share, beginning in the second quarter of 2021.23Other Liquidity and Capital Resource Activities As part of our ongoing efforts to improve our cash flow and related liquidity, we work with suppliers to optimize our terms and conditions, including extending payment terms.
We also facilitate a voluntary supply chain finance program (the "program") to provide certain of our suppliers with the opportunity to sell receivables due from us to participating financial institutions at the sole discretion of both the suppliers and the financial institutions.
A third party administers the program; our responsibility is limited to making payment on the terms originally negotiated with our supplier, regardless of whether the supplier sells its receivable to a financial institution.
We do not enter into agreements with any of the participating financial institutions in connection with the program.
The range of payment terms we negotiate with our suppliers is consistent, irrespective of whether a supplier participates in the program.
All outstanding payments owed under the program are recorded within accounts payable in our consolidated balance sheets.
The amounts owed to participating financial institutions under the program and included in accounts payable for our continuing operations were $45 million and $29 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We account for all payments made under the program as a reduction to our cash flows from operations and reported within our increase (decrease) in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, net, line within our consolidated statements of cash flows.
The amounts settled through the program and paid to participating financial institutions were $146 million, $164 million, and $117 million for our continuing operations during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
A downgrade in our credit rating or changes in the financial markets could limit the financial institutions’ willingness to commit funds to, and participate in, the program.
We do not believe such risk would have a material impact on our working capital or cash flows, as substantially all of our payments are made outside of the program.We utilize derivative and hedging instruments to manage our exposure to currency fluctuations, primarily related to the European euro, British pound, the Chinese renminbi and the U.S. dollar; occasionally, we have also used derivative and hedging instruments to manage our exposure to commodity cost fluctuations, primarily zinc and copper, and interest rate fluctuations, primarily related to debt issuances.
We review our hedging program, derivative positions and overall risk management on a regular basis.
We currently do not have any derivative instruments for which we have designated hedge accounting.24Cash FlowsSignificant sources and (uses) of cash in the past three years are summarized as follows, in millions: 202020192018Net cash from operating activities$953 $833 $1,032 Retirement of notes(400)(201)(114)Purchase of Company common stock(727)(896)(654)Cash dividends paid(145)(144)(134)Dividends paid to noncontrolling interest(23)(42)(89)Capital expenditures(114)(162)(219)Debt extinguishment costs(5)(2)— Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired(227)— (549)Issuance of notes, net of issuance costs415 — — Employee withholding taxes paid on stock-based compensation(25)(23)(42)Proceeds from disposition of: Businesses, net of cash disposed870 722 — Short-term bank deposits, net— — 108 Property and equipment1 34 14 Financial investments3 1 5 Payment of debt(2)(8)(1)Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash investments31 14 4 Other, net24 12 4 Cash increase (decrease) $629 $138 $(635)Our working capital days were as follows: At December 31, 20202019Receivable days54 54 Inventory days72 67 Accounts Payable days71 68 Working capital (receivables plus inventories, less accounts payable) as a percentage of net sales15.6 %15.7 %Net cash provided by operations of $953 million consisted primarily of net income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization expense of $133 million and stock-based compensation expense, as well as changes in working capital amounts and employee withholding taxes paid on stock-based compensation, which is classified as a financing activity.
These amounts were partially offset by the net gain on the sale of Cabinetry as well as contributions to our defined-benefit pension plans.Net cash used for financing activities was $886 million, primarily due to $727 million for the repurchase and retirement of Company common stock (as part of our strategic initiative to drive shareholder value), $400 million for the early retirement of our 3.5% Notes due April 1, 2021, $145 million for the payment of cash dividends, $25 million for employee withholding taxes paid on stock-based compensation and $23 million for dividends paid to noncontrolling interests.
These uses of cash were partially offset by the issuances of $300 million of 2.0% Notes due October 1, 2030 and an incremental $100 million on our existing 4.5% Notes due May 15, 2047 that was issued at a premium of $19 million, and $26 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.Net cash provided by investing activities was $531 million, primarily driven by $870 million of proceeds from the sale of Cabinetry, net of cash disposed.
These proceeds were partially offset by $175 million for the 2020 acquisitions, net of cash acquired, $114 million for capital expenditures and the $52 million advance payment for the acquisition of ESS that closed on January 4, 2021.25We continue to invest in our manufacturing and distribution operations of those businesses that align with our long-term growth strategy to increase our productivity, improve customer service and support product innovation.
Capital expenditures for 2020 were $114 million, compared with $162 million for 2019 and $219 million for 2018.
For 2021, capital expenditures, excluding any potential 2021 acquisitions, are expected to be approximately $150 million.
Depreciation and amortization expense for 2020 totaled $133 million, compared with $159 million for 2019 and $156 million for 2018.
For 2021, depreciation and amortization expense, excluding any potential 2021 acquisitions, is expected to be approximately $155 million.
Amortization expense totaled $28 million in 2020, compared with $27 million and $24 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively.Costs of environmental responsibilities and compliance with existing environmental laws and regulations have not had, nor do we expect them to have, a material effect on our capital expenditures, financial position or results of operations.We believe that our present cash balance and cash flows from operations, and borrowing availability under our Credit Agreement are sufficient to fund our near-term working capital and other investment needs.
We believe that our longer-term working capital and other general corporate requirements will be satisfied through cash flows from operations and, to the extent necessary, from bank borrowings and future financial market activities.
However, due to the highly uncertain nature, severity and duration or resurgence of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our customer, suppliers and employees, we are unable to fully estimate the extent of the impact it may have on our future financial condition.Consolidated Results of OperationsWe report our financial results in accordance with GAAP in the United States.
However, we believe that certain non-GAAP performance measures and ratios, used in managing the business, may provide users of this financial information with additional meaningful comparisons between current results and results in prior periods.
Non-GAAP performance measures and ratios should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, our reported results under GAAP.The following discussion of consolidated results of operations compares 2020 and 2019.
Descriptions of changes between 2019 and 2018 were excluded as there were no changes from what was disclosed in the "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" section of the December 31, 2019 Form 10-K.Sales and OperationsNet sales for 2020 were $7.2 billion, which increased seven percent compared to 2019.
Excluding the effect of currency translation, net sales increased seven percent.
The following table reconciles reported net sales to net sales excluding the effect of currency translation, in millions: Year EndedDecember 31 20202019Net sales, as reported$7,188 $6,707 Currency translation(13)— Net sales, excluding the effect of currency translation$7,175 $6,707 Net sales for 2020 increased seven percent primarily due to higher sales volume of our paints and other coating products, plumbing products, and to a lesser extent, builders' hardware, which, in aggregate, increased sales by eight percent.
This increase was slightly offset by unfavorable net selling prices of paints and other coating products, which decreased sales by one percent.Our gross profit margins were 36.0 percent, 35.4 percent and 35.0 percent in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The 2020 gross profit margin was positively impacted by increased sales volume and cost savings initiatives, including actions taken to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic impact.
Such increases were slightly offset by unfavorable net selling prices and increased commodity costs, partially attributed to tariffs.
26Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percent of sales were 18.0 percent in 2020 compared with 19.0 percent in 2019 and 18.8 percent in 2018.
The decrease in selling, general, and administrative expenses as a percentage of sales in 2020 was primarily driven by cost containment activities including those actions taken to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic impact and leverage of fixed expenses due primarily to increased sales volume.
This improvement was partially offset by an increase in other expenses (such as salaries, legal costs and advertising).The following table reconciles reported operating profit to operating profit, as adjusted to exclude certain items, dollars in millions: 202020192018Operating profit, as reported$1,295 $1,088 $1,077 Rationalization charges11 13 9 Kichler inventory step up adjustment— — 40 Impairment charge for other intangible assets— 9 — Operating profit, as adjusted$1,306 $1,110 $1,126 Operating profit margins, as reported18.0 %16.2 %16.2 %Operating profit margins, as adjusted18.2 %16.5 %16.9 %Operating profit in 2020 was positively affected by increased sales volume and cost savings initiatives, including actions taken to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic impact.
These positive impacts were partially offset by unfavorable net selling prices, increased commodity costs, partially attributed to tariffs, higher fixed expenses in our lighting business, and an increase in other expenses (such as salaries, legal cost and advertising).Other Income (Expense), NetInterest expense was $144 million, $159 million and $156 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.Other, net, for 2020 included $35 million of net periodic pension and post-retirement benefit cost and $10 million of realized foreign currency transaction losses, partially offset by $10 million of dividend income related to preferred stock of ACProducts Holding, Inc. and $9 million of income due from an escrow settlement.Income TaxesOur effective tax rate on income from continuing operations was 24 percent, 25 percent and 24 percent in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
As a result of IRS guidance issued in the third quarter of 2020 that allows us to retroactively exclude certain high-taxed foreign income from the U.S. tax effects on Global Intangible Low-taxed Income ("GILTI") back to 2018, we lowered our normalized tax rate from 26 percent to 25 percent for 2020, 2019 and 2018.Our effective tax rate in 2020 was lower than our normalized tax rate of 25 percent due primarily to a $5 million income tax benefit from a change in judgment regarding the realizability of certain deferred tax assets in our foreign jurisdictions, an additional $4 million tax benefit from stock-based compensation payments and a $6 million tax benefit due to an anticipated refund claim from the retroactive application of the exclusion of certain high-taxed foreign income from the U.S. tax effects on GILTI back to 2018.Our effective tax rate in 2018 was lower than our normalized tax rate of 25 percent due primarily to an additional $14 million tax benefit from stock-based compensation payments, partially offset by a $6 million tax expense recognized on GILTI, prior to the retroactive exclusion of certain high-taxed foreign income as allowed under the recently issued IRS guidance in 2020.Refer to Note S to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Income and Income Per Common Share from Continuing Operations (Attributable to Masco Corporation)Income and diluted income per common share from continuing operations for 2020 were $810 million and $3.04 per common share, respectively.
Income and diluted income per common share from continuing operations for 2019 were $639 million and $2.20 per common share, respectively.
Income and diluted income per common share from continuing operations for 2018 were $636 million and $2.05 per common share, respectively.27Outlook for the CompanyWe continue to execute our strategies of leveraging our strong brand portfolio, industry-leading positions and the Masco Operating System, our methodology to drive growth and productivity, to create long-term shareholder value.
We believe that our strong financial position and cash flow generation, together with our investments in our industry-leading branded building products, our continued focus on innovation and disciplined capital allocation, will allow us to drive long-term growth and create value for our shareholders.
While we continue to remain uncertain regarding the short-term impact that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our businesses, we remain confident in the fundamentals of our businesses and long-term strategy.28Business Segment and Geographic Area ResultsThe following table sets forth our net sales and operating profit information for our continuing operations by business segment and geographic area, dollars in millions.
PercentChange 2020201920182020 vs.20192019 vs.2018Net Sales:
 Plumbing Products$4,136 $3,984 $3,998 4 %— %Decorative Architectural Products3,052 2,723 2,656 12 %3 %Total$7,188 $6,707 $6,654 7 %1 %North America$5,805 $5,328 $5,208 9 %2 %International, principally Europe1,383 1,379 1,446 — %(5)%Total$7,188 $6,707 $6,654 7 %1 % 202020192018Operating Profit: (A) Plumbing Products$806 $708 $715 Decorative Architectural Products583 480 456 Total$1,389 $1,188 $1,171 North America$1,167 $987 $954 International, principally Europe222 201 217 Total1,389 1,188 1,171 General corporate expense, net(94)(100)(94)Total operating profit$1,295 $1,088 $1,077 (A)Before general corporate expense, net; refer to Note Q to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.29Business Segment Results DiscussionChanges in operating profit in the following Business Segment and Geographic Area Results discussion exclude general corporate expense, net, and compares each respective period to the same period of the immediately preceding year.
Description of changes to sales and operating profit between 2019 and 2018 for the Plumbing Products and Decorative Architectural Products segments, as well as geographic areas, were excluded as there were no changes from what was disclosed in the "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" section of the December 31, 2019 Form 10-K.
Plumbing ProductsSalesNet sales in the Plumbing Products segment increased four percent in 2020 due primarily to higher sales volume of North American operations, which increased sales by three percent.
Favorable foreign currency translation further increased sales by one percent.Operating ResultsOperating profit in the Plumbing Products segment in 2020 was positively impacted by cost savings initiatives, including actions taken to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic impact, higher sales volume and favorable net selling prices.
These positive impacts were partially offset by increased commodity costs, including tariffs, and an increase in other expenses (such as salaries and legal costs).
Decorative Architectural ProductsSalesNet sales in the Decorative Architectural Products segment increased 12 percent in 2020, due mostly to higher sales volume of paints and other coating products, and to a lesser extent, builders' hardware products.
Such increases were slightly offset by unfavorable net selling prices of paints and other coating products.
Operating ResultsOperating profit in the Decorative Architectural Products segment in 2020 benefited primarily from higher sales volume, as well as cost savings initiatives, including actions taken to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic impact, and decreased commodity costs.
Additionally, operating profit was positively impacted by the non-recurrence of a 2019 non-cash impairment charge related to an other indefinite-lived intangible asset for a trademark associated with lighting products.
These positive impacts were partially offset by unfavorable net selling prices, higher fixed expenses in our lighting business, and an increase in other expenses (such as salaries, legal costs and advertising).
Business Rationalizations and Other InitiativesOver the last several years, we have taken several actions focused on the strategic rationalization of our businesses including business consolidations, plant closures, headcount reductions and other cost savings initiatives.
In 2020, 2019 and 2018, we incurred net pre-tax costs and charges related to these initiatives of $11 million, $13 million, and $9 million, respectively.We continue to realize the benefits of our business rationalizations and continuous improvement initiatives across our enterprise and expect to identify additional opportunities to improve our business operations.During 2020, 2019 and 2018, our Plumbing Products segment incurred costs and charges of $7 million, $13 million and $9 million, respectively and our Decorative Architectural Products segment incurred costs and charges of $4 million in 2020.
The 2020 costs primarily related to business and plant consolidation and severance costs in North America.30Geographic Area Results DiscussionNorth AmericaSalesNorth American net sales in 2020 increased nine percent.
Higher sales volume of paints and other coating products, plumbing products, and to a lesser extent, builders' hardware, in aggregate, increased sales by 10 percent.
Such increases were slightly offset by unfavorable net selling prices of paints and other coating products, which decreased sales by one percent.Operating ResultsOperating profit from North American operations in 2020 was positively affected by higher sales volume, cost savings initiatives, including actions taken to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic impact and favorable sales mix of plumbing products.
Additionally, operating profit was positively impacted by the non-recurrence of a 2019 non-cash impairment charge related to an other indefinite-lived intangible asset for a trademark associated with lighting products.
These positive impacts were partially offset by unfavorable net selling prices and increased commodity costs, primarily attributable to tariffs.
Additionally, operating profit was adversely impacted by higher fixed expenses in our lighting business, and an increase in other expenses (such as salaries, legal costs and advertising).International, Principally EuropeSalesNet sales from International operations in 2020 were flat.
In local currencies (including sales in foreign currencies outside their respective functional currencies), net sales decreased one percent due to unfavorable sales mix of plumbing products that was partially offset by favorable net selling prices of plumbing products.Operating ResultsOperating profit from International operations in 2020 was positively impacted by cost savings initiatives, including actions taken to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic impact, and favorable net selling prices.
These positive impacts were partially offset by unfavorable sales mix.31Other MattersCommitments and ContingenciesLitigationInformation regarding our legal proceedings is set forth in Note U to the consolidated financial statements, which is incorporated herein by reference.Other CommitmentsWe enter into contracts, which include reasonable and customary indemnifications that are standard for the industries in which we operate.
Such indemnifications include claims made against builders by homeowners for issues relating to our products and workmanship.
In conjunction with divestitures and other transactions, we occasionally provide reasonable and customary indemnifications.
We have never had to pay a material amount related to these indemnifications, and we evaluate the probability that amounts may be incurred and record an estimated liability when probable and reasonably estimable.Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting PronouncementsRefer to Note A to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of recently adopted and issued accounting pronouncements, which is incorporated herein by reference.
32Contractual ObligationsThe following table provides payment obligations related to current contracts at December 31, 2020, in millions: Payments Due by Period 20212022-20232024-2025Beyond2025OtherTotalDebt (A)$3 $337 $506 $1,948 $— $2,794 Interest (A)130 231 209 614 — 1,184 Operating leases46 64 36 89 — 235 Currently payable income taxes16 — — — — 16 Private equity funds (B)— — — — 4 4 Purchase commitments (C)307 — — — — 307 Uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties (D)— — — — 84 84 Total$502 $632 $751 $2,651 $88 $4,624 ______________________________(A)We assume that all debt would be held to maturity.
Amounts include finance lease obligations.
(B)There is no schedule for the capital commitments to the private equity funds; accordingly, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate as to when capital commitments may be paid.
(C)Excludes contracts that do not require volume commitments and open or pending purchase orders.
(D)Due to the high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows associated with uncertain tax positions, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate for the year in which cash settlements may occur with applicable tax authorities.Refer to Note N to the consolidated financial statements for defined-benefit pension plan obligations.33Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk.We have considered the provisions of accounting guidance regarding disclosure of accounting policies for derivative financial instruments and disclosure of quantitative and qualitative information about market risk inherent in derivative financial instruments and other financial instruments.We are exposed to the impact of changes in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates, particularly changes between the U.S. dollar and the European euro, British pound, Canadian dollar, and Chinese renminbi, and to market price fluctuations related to our financial investments.
We have insignificant involvement with derivative financial instruments and use such instruments to the extent necessary to manage exposure to foreign currency fluctuations.
At December 31, 2020, we performed sensitivity analyses to assess the potential loss in the fair values of market risk sensitive instruments resulting from a hypothetical change of 10 percent in foreign currency exchange rates, a 10 percent decline in the market value of our long-term investments, or a 100 basis point change in interest rates.
Based upon the analyses performed, such changes would not be expected to materially affect our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.34Item 8.Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.Management's Report on Internal Control Over Financial ReportingOur management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting.
Our internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.We assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020 using the criteria set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission ("COSO") in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013).
Based on this assessment, we have determined that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2020.PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, has audited the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, as stated in their report, which is presented herein.
Their report expressed an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020 and expressed an unqualified opinion on our 2020 consolidated financial statements.
This report appears under 'Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data' under the heading "Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
"35Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting FirmTo the Board of Directors and Shareholders of Masco CorporationOpinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial ReportingWe have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Masco Corporation and its subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the related consolidated statements of operations, of comprehensive income (loss), of shareholders' equity and of cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, including the related notes and financial statement schedule listed in the index appearing under Item 15(a)(2) (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”).
We also have audited the Company's internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the COSO.Basis for OpinionsThe Company's management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.
Our responsibility is to express opinions on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and on the Company's internal control over financial reporting based on our audits.
We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks.
Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements.
Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements.
Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk.
Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial ReportingA company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable 36assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.Critical Audit MattersThe critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the consolidated financial statements that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (i) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the consolidated financial statements and (ii) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments.
The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.Goodwill Impairment AssessmentsAs described in Notes A and H to the consolidated financial statements, the Company’s consolidated goodwill balance was $563 million as of December 31, 2020.
Management performs an annual impairment test of goodwill in the fourth quarter of each year, or as events occur or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying value of goodwill may be impaired.
Potential impairment is identified by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill.
Management estimates fair value by using a discounted cash flow model.
The determination of fair value using the discounted cash flow model requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions related to forecasted sales and operating profits, and the discount rate.
The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to the goodwill impairment assessments is a critical audit matter are (i) the significant judgment by management when developing the fair value measurements of the reporting units; (ii) a high degree of auditor judgment, subjectivity, and effort in performing procedures to evaluate management’s discounted cash flow model, including significant assumptions related to forecasted sales and the discount rates; and (iii) the audit effort involved the use of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge.
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall opinion on the consolidated financial statements.
These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to management’s goodwill impairment assessments, including controls over the valuation of the Company’s reporting units.
These procedures also included, among others, testing management’s process for developing the fair value estimates; evaluating the appropriateness of the discounted cash flow model; testing the completeness, accuracy, and relevance of underlying data used in the model; and, evaluating the significant assumptions used by management, including forecasted sales and the discount rates.
Professionals with specialized skill and knowledge were used to assist in evaluating the Company’s discount rate assumptions.
Evaluating management’s assumption related to forecasted sales involved evaluating whether the assumptions used were reasonable considering (i) the current and past performance of the reporting units, (ii) the consistency with external market and industry data as relates to forecasted sales, and (iii) whether they were consistent with evidence obtained in other areas of the audit./s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLPDetroit, MichiganFebruary 9, 2021 We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1959.
37Financial Statements and Supplementary DataMASCO CORPORATION and Consolidated SubsidiariesCONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETSDecember 31, 2020 and 2019(In Millions, Except Share Data) 20202019ASSETS Current Assets: Cash and cash investments$1,326 $697 Receivables1,138 997 Inventories876 754 Prepaid expenses and other149 90 Assets held for sale— 173 Total current assets3,489 2,711 Property and equipment, net908 878 Goodwill563 509 Other intangible assets, net357 259 Operating lease right-of-use assets166 176 Other assets294 139 Assets held for sale— 355 Total assets$5,777 $5,027 LIABILITIESCurrent Liabilities:Accounts payable$893 $697 Notes payable3 2 Accrued liabilities1,038 700 Liabilities held for sale— 149 Total current liabilities1,934 1,548 Long-term debt2,792 2,771 Noncurrent operating lease liabilities149 162 Other liabilities481 589 Liabilities held for sale— 13 Total liabilities5,356 5,083 Commitments and contingencies (Note U)EQUITYMasco Corporation's shareholders' equity: Common shares, par value $1 per share
Authorized shares: 1,400,000,000;
Issued and outstanding: 2020 – 258,200,000; 2019 – 275,600,000258 276 Preferred shares authorized: 1,000,000;
Issued and outstanding: 2020 and 2019 – None— — Paid-in capital— — Retained earnings (deficit)79 (332) Accumulated other comprehensive loss(142)(179)Total Masco Corporation's shareholders' equity (deficit)195 (235) Noncontrolling interest226 179 Total equity421 (56)Total liabilities and equity$5,777 $5,027 See notes to consolidated financial statements.38MASCO CORPORATION and Consolidated SubsidiariesCONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONSFor the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018(In Millions, Except Per Common Share Data) 202020192018Net sales$7,188 $6,707 $6,654 Cost of sales4,601 4,336 4,327 Gross profit2,587 2,371 2,327 Selling, general and administrative expenses1,292 1,274 1,250 Impairment charge for other intangible assets— 9 — Operating profit1,295 1,088 1,077 Other income (expense), net: Interest expense(144)(159)(156)Other, net(20)(15)(14)(164)(174)(170)Income from continuing operations before income taxes1,131 914 907 Income tax expense269 230 221 Income from continuing operations862 684 686 Income from discontinued operations, net414 296 98 Net income1,276 980 784 Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest52 45 50 Net income attributable to Masco Corporation$1,224 $935 $734 Income per common share attributable to Masco Corporation: Basic: Income from continuing operations$3.05 $2.21 $2.06 Income from discontinued operations, net1.55 1.03 0.32 Net income$4.60 $3.24 $2.38 Diluted: Income from continuing operations$3.04 $2.20 $2.05 Income from discontinued operations, net1.55 1.02 0.32 Net income$4.59 $3.22 $2.37 Amounts attributable to Masco Corporation: Income from continuing operations$810 $639 $636 Income from discontinued operations, net414 296 98 Net income$1,224 $935 $734
See notes to consolidated financial statements.39MASCO CORPORATION and Consolidated SubsidiariesCONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)For the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018(In Millions) 202020192018Net income$1,276 $980 $784 Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest52 45 50 Net income attributable to Masco Corporation$1,224 $935 $734 Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax (Note P): Cumulative translation adjustment$72 $6 $(31)Interest rate swaps1 2 2 Pension and other post-retirement benefits(18)(64)9 Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax55 (56)(20)Less: Other comprehensive income (loss) attributable to the noncontrolling interest: Cumulative translation adjustment$20 $(1)$(15)Pension and other post-retirement benefits(2)(3)(2)18 (4)(17)Other comprehensive income (loss) attributable to Masco Corporation$37 $(52)$(3)Total comprehensive income$1,331 $924 $764 Less: Total comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interest

70 41 33 Total comprehensive income attributable to Masco Corporation$1,261 $883 $731
See notes to consolidated financial statements.40MASCO CORPORATION and Consolidated SubsidiariesCONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWSFor the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018(In Millions) 202020192018CASH FLOWS FROM (FOR) OPERATING ACTIVITIES: Net income$1,276 $980 $784 Depreciation and amortization133 159 156 Display amortization2 12 21 Deferred income taxes(3)(41)4 Employee withholding taxes paid on stock-based compensation25 23 42 Gain on disposition of investments, net(3)(1)(4)Gain on disposition of businesses, net(602)(298)— Pension and other post-retirement benefits(32)(45)(47)Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets— 16 — Stock-based compensation45 35 27 Dividends paid-in-kind(10)— — Increase in receivables(141)(37)(46)(Increase) decrease in inventories(89)58 (11)Increase (decrease) in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, net332 (27)108 Other, net20 (1)(2)Net cash from operating activities953 833 1,032 CASH FLOWS FROM (FOR) FINANCING ACTIVITIES: Retirement of notes(400)(201)(114)Purchase of Company common stock(727)(896)(654)Cash dividends paid(145)(144)(134)Dividends paid to noncontrolling interest(23)(42)(89)Issuance of notes, net of issuance costs415 — — Debt extinguishment costs(5)(2)— Proceeds from the exercise of stock options26 27 14 Employee withholding taxes paid on stock-based compensation(25)(23)(42)Payment of debt(2)(8)(1)Credit Agreement and other financing costs— (2)— Net cash for financing activities(886)(1,291)(1,020)CASH FLOWS FROM (FOR) INVESTING ACTIVITIES:Capital expenditures(114)(162)(219)Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired(227)— (549)Proceeds from disposition of:Businesses, net of cash disposed870 722 — Short-term bank deposits— — 108 Property and equipment1 34 14 Other financial investments3 1 5 Other, net(2)(13)(10)Net cash from (for) investing activities531 582 (651)Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash investments31 14 4 CASH AND CASH INVESTMENTS: Increase (decrease) for the year629 138 (635)At January 1697 559 1,194 At December 31$1,326 $697 $559 See notes to consolidated financial statements.41MASCO CORPORATION and Consolidated SubsidiariesCONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITYFor the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018(In Millions, Except Per Common Share Data) TotalCommonShares($1 par value)Paid-InCapitalRetained(Deficit)Earnings AccumulatedOtherComprehensive(Loss) IncomeNoncontrollingInterestBalance, January 1, 2018$183 $310 $— $(298)$(65)$236 Reclassification of disproportionate tax effects (Refer to Note P)— 59 (59)Total comprehensive income (loss)764 734 (3)33 Shares issued(9)3 (4)(8)Shares retired:Repurchased(654)(19)(26)(609)Surrendered (non-cash)(19)(19)Cash dividends declared(137)(137)Dividends paid to noncontrolling interest(89)(89)Stock-based compensation30 30 Balance, December 31, 2018$69 $294 $— $(278)$(127)$180 Total comprehensive income (loss)924 935 (52)41 Shares issued15 3 12 Shares retired: Repurchased(896)(20)(42)(834)Surrendered (non-cash)(10)(1)(9)Cash dividends declared(146)(146)Dividends paid to noncontrolling interest(42)(42)Stock-based compensation30 30 Balance, December 31, 2019$(56)$276 $— $(332)$(179)$179 Cumulative effect of adoption of new credit loss standard (refer to Note A)(1)(1)Balance, January 1, 2020$(57)$276 $— $(333)$(179)$179 Total comprehensive income1,331 1,224 37 70 Shares issued14 2 12 Shares retired: Repurchased(727)(19)(53)(655)Surrendered (non-cash)(14)(1)(13)Cash dividends declared(144)(144)Dividends paid to noncontrolling interest(23)(23)Stock-based compensation41 41 Balance, December 31, 2020$421 $258 $— $79 $(142)$226 See notes to consolidated financial statements.42MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTSA.
ACCOUNTING POLICIESPrinciples of Consolidation.
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Masco Corporation and all majority-owned subsidiaries.
All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated.
We consolidate the assets, liabilities and results of operations of variable interest entities for which we are the primary beneficiary.Use of Estimates and Assumptions in the Preparation of Financial Statements.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted ("GAAP") in the United States of America requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of any contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions.Revenue Recognition.
We recognize revenue as control of our products is transferred to our customers, which is generally at the time of shipment or upon delivery based on the contractual terms with our customers.
Our customers' payment terms generally range from 30 to 65 days of fulfilling our performance obligations and recognizing revenue.
We provide customer programs and incentive offerings, including special pricing and co-operative advertising arrangements, promotions and other volume-based incentives.
These customer programs and incentives are considered variable consideration.
We include in revenue variable consideration only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the variable consideration is resolved.
This determination is made based upon known customer program and incentive offerings at the time of sale, and expected sales volume forecasts as it relates to our volume-based incentives.
This determination is updated each reporting period.
Certain product sales include a right of return.
We estimate future product returns at the time of sale based on historical experience and record a corresponding refund liability.
We additionally record an asset, based on historical experience, for the amount of product we expect to return to inventory as a result of the return, which is recorded in prepaid expenses and other in the consolidated balance sheets.We consider shipping and handling activities performed by us as activities to fulfill the sales of our products.
Amounts billed for shipping and handling are included in net sales, while costs incurred for shipping and handling are included in cost of sales.
We capitalize incremental costs of obtaining a contract and expense the costs on a straight-line basis over the contractual period if the cost is recoverable, the cost would not have been incurred without the contract and the term of the contract is greater than one year; otherwise, we expense the amounts as incurred.
We do not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a financing component if the period between when we transfer our products or services and when our customers pay for our products or services is expected to be one year or less.Customer Displays.
In-store displays that are owned by us and used to market our products are included in other assets in the consolidated balance sheets and are amortized using the straight-line method over the expected useful life of three to five years; related amortization expense is classified as a selling expense in the consolidated statements of operations.Foreign Currency.
The financial statements of our foreign subsidiaries are measured using the local currency as the functional currency.
Assets and liabilities of these subsidiaries are translated at exchange rates as of the balance sheet dates.
Revenues and expenses are translated at average exchange rates in effect during the year.
The resulting cumulative translation adjustments have been recorded in the accumulated other comprehensive loss component of shareholders' equity.
Realized foreign currency transaction gains and losses are included in the consolidated statements of operations in other income (expense), net.Cash and Cash Investments.
We consider all highly liquid investments with an initial maturity of three months or less to be cash and cash investments.43MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)A.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)Receivables.
We do business with a number of customers, including certain home center retailers.
We monitor our exposure for credit losses on customer receivable balances and other financial investments measured at amortized cost and the credit worthiness of customers on an on-going basis, including requiring the completion of credit applications and performing periodic reviews of our open accounts receivable.
We record allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to fulfill their required payment obligation to us.
Allowances are estimated based upon specific customer balances, where a risk of loss has been identified, and also include a provision for losses based upon historical collection experience and write-off activity as well as reasonable and supportable forecast information that considers macro-economic factors and industry-specific trends associated with our businesses, among others.
A separate allowance is recorded for customer incentive rebates and is generally based upon sales activity.
Receivables are presented net of certain allowances (including allowances for doubtful accounts) of $48 million and $36 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our receivables balances are generally due in less than one year.
Property and Equipment.
Property and equipment, including significant improvements to existing facilities, are recorded at cost.
Upon retirement or disposal, the cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any gain or loss is included in the consolidated statements of operations.
Maintenance and repair costs are charged against earnings as incurred.We review our property and equipment as events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the property and equipment below its carrying amount.
If the carrying amount of property and equipment is not recoverable from its undiscounted cash flows, then we would recognize an impairment loss for the difference between the carrying amount and the current fair value.
Further, we evaluate the remaining useful lives of property and equipment at each reporting period to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining depreciation periods.Depreciation.
Depreciation expense is computed principally using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
Annual depreciation rates are as follows: buildings and land improvements, 2 to 10 percent, computer hardware and software, 17 to 33 percent, and machinery and equipment, 5 to 33 percent.
Depreciation expense, including discontinued operations, was $105 million in 2020 and $132 million in both 2019 and 2018.
Leases.
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception.
Operating leases are included in operating lease right-of-use assets (“ROU assets”), accrued liabilities and noncurrent operating lease liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet.
Finance lease ROU assets are included in property and equipment, net, notes payable, and long-term debt on our consolidated balance sheet.ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the duration of the lease term while lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments in exchange for the right to use an underlying asset.
ROU assets and lease liabilities are measured based on the present value of fixed lease payments over the lease term at the commencement date.
The ROU asset also includes any lease payments made prior to the commencement date and initial direct costs incurred, and is reduced by any lease incentives received.
We review our ROU assets as events occur or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount of the ROU assets are not recoverable and exceed their fair values.
If the carrying amount of the ROU asset is not recoverable from its undiscounted cash flows, then we would recognize an impairment loss for the difference between the carrying amount and the current fair value.As most of our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we generally use our incremental borrowing rate on the commencement date of the lease as the discount rate in determining the present value of future lease payments.
We determine the incremental borrowing rate for each lease by using the current yields of our uncollateralized, publicly traded debts with maturity periods similar to the respective lease term, adjusted to a collateralized basis based on third-party data.
Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when there are relevant economic incentives present that make it reasonably certain that we will exercise that option.
We account for any non-lease components separately from lease components.
44MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)A.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)For operating leases, lease expense for future fixed lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
For finance leases, lease expense for future fixed lease payments is recognized using the effective interest rate method over the lease term.
Variable lease payments are recognized as lease expense in the period incurred.
Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheet; we recognize lease expense for these leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets.
We perform our annual impairment testing of goodwill in the fourth quarter of each year, or as events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount.
We have defined our reporting units and completed the impairment testing of goodwill at the operating segment level.
Our operating segments are reporting units that engage in business activities, for which discrete financial information, including five-year forecasts, are available.
We compare the fair value of the reporting units to the carrying value of the reporting units for goodwill impairment testing.
Fair value is determined using a discounted cash flow method, which includes significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 inputs), and requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including long-term projections of cash flows, market conditions and appropriate discount rates.
Our judgments are based upon historical experience, current market trends, consultations with external valuation specialists and other information.
In estimating future cash flows, we rely on internally generated five-year forecasts for sales and operating profits, and, currently, a two percent to three percent long-term assumed annual growth rate of cash flows for periods after the five-year forecast.
For 2020, we utilized a weighted average cost of capital of approximately 8.0 percent as the basis to determine the discount rate to apply to the estimated future cash flows.
Based upon our assessment of the risks impacting each of our businesses, we applied a risk premium to increase the discount rate to a range of 10.0 percent to 12.0 percent for our reporting units.
If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized to the extent that a reporting unit's carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill in that reporting unit.We review our other indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually in the fourth quarter, or as events occur or circumstances change that indicate the assets may be impaired without regard to the business unit.
Potential impairment is identified by comparing the fair value of an other indefinite-lived intangible asset to its carrying value.
We utilize a relief-from-royalty model to estimate the fair value of other indefinite-lived intangible assets.
We consider the implications of both external (e.g., market growth, competition and local economic conditions) and internal (e.g., product sales and expected product growth) factors and their potential impact on cash flows related to the intangible asset in both the near- and long-term.
We also consider the profitability of the business, among other factors, to determine the royalty rate for use in the impairment assessment.
We utilize our weighted average cost of capital of approximately 8.0 percent as the basis to determine the discount rate to apply to the estimated future cash flows.
In 2020, based upon our assessment of the risks impacting each of our businesses and the nature of the trade name, we applied a risk premium to increase the discount rate to a range of 11.0 percent to 12.5 percent for our other indefinite-lived intangible assets.While we believe that the estimates and assumptions underlying the valuation methodologies are reasonable, different estimates and assumptions could result in different outcomes.
Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives.
We review our intangible assets with finite useful lives as events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the assets below its carrying amount.
If the carrying amount of the assets is not recoverable from the undiscounted cash flows, then we would recognize an impairment loss for the difference between the carrying amount and the current fair value.
We evaluate the remaining useful lives of amortizable intangible assets at each reporting period to determine whether events or circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization.
Refer to Note H for additional information regarding goodwill and other intangible assets.45MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)A.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)Acquisitions.
In accordance with accounting guidance for the provisions in Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") ASC 805, "Business Combinations," we allocate the purchase price of an acquired business to its identifiable assets and liabilities based on estimated fair values.
The excess of the purchase price over the amount allocated to the assets and liabilities, if any, is recorded as goodwill.
In addition, any contingent consideration is fair valued as of the date of the acquisition and is recorded as part of the purchase price.
This estimate is updated in future periods and any changes in the estimate, which are not considered an adjustment to the purchase price, are recorded in our consolidated statements of operations.We use all available information to estimate fair values.
We typically engage external valuation specialists to assist in the fair value determination of identifiable intangible assets and any other significant assets or liabilities.
We adjust the preliminary purchase price allocation, as necessary, up to one year after the acquisition closing date as we obtain more information regarding assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date.Our purchase price allocation methodology contains uncertainties because it requires us to make assumptions and to apply judgment to estimate the fair value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities.
We estimate the fair value of assets and liabilities based upon the carrying value of the acquired assets and assumed liabilities and widely accepted valuation techniques, including discounted cash flows.
Unanticipated events or circumstances may occur which could affect the accuracy of our fair value estimates, including assumptions regarding industry economic factors and business strategies.Other estimates used in determining fair value include, but are not limited to, future cash flows or income related to intangibles, market rate assumptions and appropriate discount rates.
Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but that are inherently uncertain, and therefore, may not be realized.
Accordingly, there can be no assurance that the estimates, assumptions, and values reflected in the valuations will be realized, and actual results could vary materially.Refer to Note B for additional information regarding acquisitions.Fair Value Accounting.
We use derivative financial instruments to manage certain exposure to fluctuations in earnings and cash flows resulting from changes in foreign currency exchange rates, and occasionally from changes in commodity costs and interest rate exposures.
Derivative financial instruments are recorded in the consolidated balance sheets as either an asset or liability measured at fair value, netted by counterparty, where the right of offset exists.
The gain or loss is recognized in determining current earnings during the period of the change in fair value.
We currently do not have any derivative instruments for which we have designated hedge accounting.Refer to Note I for additional information regarding fair value of financial instruments.
Warranty.
We offer limited warranties on certain products with warranty periods ranging up to the lifetime of the product to the original consumer purchaser.
At the time of sale, we accrue a warranty liability for the estimated future cost to provide products, parts or services to repair or replace products to satisfy our warranty obligations.
Our estimate of future costs to service our warranty obligations is based upon the information available and includes a number of factors, such as the warranty coverage, the warranty period, historical experience specific to the nature, frequency and average cost to service the claim, along with industry and demographic trends.Certain factors and related assumptions in determining our warranty liability involve judgments and estimates and are sensitive to changes in the factors described above.
We believe that the warranty accrual is appropriate; however, actual claims incurred could differ from our original estimates which would require us to adjust our previously established accruals.
Refer to Note U for additional information on our warranty accrual.A significant portion of our business is at the consumer retail level through home center retailers and other major retailers.
A consumer may return a product to a retail outlet that is a warranty return.
However, certain retail outlets do not distinguish between warranty and other types of returns when they claim a return deduction from us.
Our revenue recognition policy takes into account this type of return when recognizing revenue, and an estimate of these amounts is recorded as a deduction to net sales at the time of sale.46MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)A.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)Insurance Reserves.
We provide for expenses associated with workers' compensation and product liability obligations when such amounts are probable and can be reasonably estimated.
The accruals are adjusted as new information develops or circumstances change that would affect the estimated liability.
Any obligations expected to be settled within 12 months are recorded in accrued liabilities; all other obligations are recorded in other liabilities.Litigation.
We are involved in claims and litigation, including class actions, mass torts and regulatory proceedings, which arise in the ordinary course of our business.
Liabilities and costs associated with these matters require estimates and judgments based upon our professional knowledge and experience and that of our legal counsel.
When a liability is probable of being incurred and our exposure in these matters is reasonably estimable, amounts are recorded as charges to earnings.
The ultimate resolution of these exposures may differ due to subsequent developments.Stock-Based Compensation.
We issue stock-based incentives in various forms to our employees and non-employee Directors.
Outstanding stock-based incentives were in the form of long-term stock awards, stock options, restricted stock units ("RSUs"), performance restricted stock units ("PRSUs") and phantom stock awards.We measure compensation expense for stock awards and RSUs at the market price of our common stock at the grant date.
We measure compensation expense for stock options using a Black-Scholes option pricing model.
We measure compensation expense for PRSUs at the expected payout of the awards.
We recognize forfeitures related to stock awards, stock options, RSUs and PRSUs as they occur.
We initially measure compensation expense for phantom stock awards at the market price of our common stock at the grant date.
Phantom stock awards are linked to the value of our common stock on the date of grant and are settled in cash upon vesting.
We account for phantom stock awards as liability-based awards; the liability is remeasured and adjusted at the end of each reporting period until the awards are fully-vested and paid to the employees.In December 2019, our Organization and Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors (the "Compensation Committee") amended the terms of equity awards under our 2014 Long Term Stock Incentive Plan to provide that newly issued stock options, RSUs and phantom stock awards vest over a three-year period and redefined retirement-eligibility as age 65 or age 55 with at least 10 years of continuous service.
As such, compensation expense for equity awards granted in 2020 and thereafter is recognized ratably over the shorter of the vesting period, typically three years, or the length of time until the grantee becomes retirement eligible.
For prior year grants, expense was recognized ratably over the shorter of the vesting period of the stock awards, stock options and phantom stock awards, typically five years, or the length of time until the grantee became retirement-eligible, generally at age 65.
Expense for PRSUs is recognized ratably over the three-year vesting period of the units.Refer to Note M for additional information on stock-based compensation.Noncontrolling Interest.
We owned 68 percent of Hansgrohe SE at both December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The aggregate noncontrolling interest, net of dividends, at December 31, 2020 and 2019 has been recorded as a component of equity on our consolidated balance sheets.Discontinued Operations.
We report financial results for discontinued operations separately from continuing operations to distinguish the financial impact of disposal transactions from ongoing operations.
Discontinued operations reporting occurs only when the disposal of a component or a group of components represents a strategic shift that will have a major effect on our operations and financial results.
In our consolidated statements of cash flows, the cash flow from discontinued operations are not separately classified.
Refer to Note C for further information regarding our discontinued operations.47MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)A.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)Income Taxes.
Deferred taxes are recognized based on the future tax consequences of differences between the financial statement carrying value of assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis.
The future realization of deferred tax assets depends on the existence of sufficient taxable income in future periods.
Possible sources of taxable income include taxable income in carryback periods, the future reversal of existing taxable temporary differences recorded as a deferred tax liability, tax-planning strategies that generate future income or gains in excess of anticipated losses in the carryforward period and projected future taxable income.If, based upon all available evidence, both positive and negative, it is more likely than not (more than 50 percent likely) such deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is recorded.
Significant weight is given to positive and negative evidence that is objectively verifiable.
A company's three-year cumulative loss position is significant negative evidence in considering whether deferred tax assets are realizable, and the accounting guidance restricts the amount of reliance we can place on projected taxable income to support the recovery of the deferred tax assets.
The current accounting guidance allows the recognition of only those income tax positions that have a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities.
We believe that there is an increased potential for volatility in our effective tax rate because this threshold allows for changes in the income tax environment and, to a greater extent, the inherent complexities of income tax law in a substantial number of jurisdictions, which may affect the computation of our liability for uncertain tax positions.We record interest and penalties on our uncertain tax positions in income tax expense.The accounting guidance for income taxes requires us to allocate our provision for income taxes between continuing operations and other categories of earnings, such as other comprehensive income (loss).
Subsequent adjustments to deferred taxes originally recorded to other comprehensive income (loss) may reverse in a different category of earnings, such as continuing operations, resulting in a disproportionate tax effect within accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
Generally, a disproportionate tax effect will be eliminated and recognized in income tax expense when the circumstances upon which it is premised cease to exist.
The disproportionate tax effect related to various defined-benefit pension plans will be eliminated from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) at the termination of the related pension plans.
The disproportionate tax effect relating to our interest rate swap hedge, which was terminated in 2012, will be eliminated from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) upon the maturity of the related debt in March 2022.We record the tax effects of Global Intangible Low-taxed Income related to our foreign operations as a component of income tax expense in the period the tax arises.Reclassifications.
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the 2020 presentation in the consolidated financial statements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, "Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments," which modifies the methodology for recognizing loss impairments on certain types of financial instruments, including receivables.
The new methodology requires an entity to estimate the credit losses expected over the life of an exposure.
Additionally, ASU 2016-13 amends the current available-for-sale security other-than-temporary impairment model for debt securities.
We adopted ASU 2016-13 and recorded a cumulative-effect adjustment to opening retained earnings on January 1, 2020.
The adoption of the standard did not have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations.In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, "Intangibles-Goodwill and Other-Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40): Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That Is a Service Contract," which allows for the capitalization of certain implementation costs incurred in a hosting arrangement that is a service contract.
We adopted ASU 2018-15 prospectively beginning on January 1, 2020.
The adoption of the standard did not have an impact on our financial position or results of operations.48MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)A.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Concluded)In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, "Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes," which simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740.
The amendments also improve consistent application of and simplify GAAP for other areas of Topic 740 by clarifying and amending existing guidance.
We early adopted ASU 2019-12 on January 1, 2020.
The adoption of the standard did not have an impact on our financial position or results of operations.Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements.
In January 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-01, "Investments—Equity Securities (Topic 321)," "Investments—Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323)," and "Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815): Clarifying the Interactions between Topic 321, Topic 323, and Topic 815," which clarifies that an entity should consider observable transactions when either applying or discontinuing the equity method of accounting for the purposes of applying the measurement alternative in accordance with Topic 321.
ASU 2020-01 clarifies that for certain forward contracts or purchased options to acquire investments, an entity should not consider whether, upon settlement of the forward contract or exercise of the purchased option, the underlying securities would be accounted for under the equity method or the fair value option.
ASU 2020-01 is effective for us for annual periods beginning January 1, 2021.
Early adoption is permitted.
We plan to adopt this standard for annual periods beginning January 1, 2021 and do not anticipate that the adoption of this new standard will have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04, "Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting," which provides optional guidance and expedients for applying GAAP to contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions affected by reference rate reform if certain criteria are met.
The amendments are intended to ease the potential burden in accounting for (or recognizing the effects of) reference rate reform on financial reporting.
The amendments in this update are elective and are effective upon issuance.
As of December 31, 2020 we have not elected any of the expedients set out in ASU 2020-04.
To the extent we modify a contract going forward during the transition period we would consider applying the new standard.We consider the applicability and impact of all ASUs.
ASUs not listed above were assessed and determined not to be applicable.49MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)B. ACQUISITIONSIn the first quarter of 2020, we acquired all of the share capital of SmarTap A.Y Ltd. ("SmarTap") for approximately $24 million in cash.
SmarTap is a developer of a smart bathing system that monitors and controls the temperature and flow of water.
This acquisition provides an adaptable solution for a wide range of products as it is compatible with showerheads, hand showers, spouts and shower jets.
This business is included in the Plumbing Products segment.
In connection with this acquisition, we recognized $10 million of definite-lived intangible assets, primarily related to technology, which is being amortized on a straight-line basis over a weighted average amortization period of 5 years.
We also recognized $14 million of goodwill, which is not tax deductible, and is related primarily to the expected synergies from combining the operations into our business.In the fourth quarter of 2020, we acquired substantially all of the net assets of Kraus USA Inc. ("Kraus"), a designer and distributor of sinks, faucets and accessories for the kitchen and bathroom, for approximately $103 million and an additional cash payment of up to $50 million contingent upon the achievement of certain financial performance metrics for the year ending December 31, 2022.
The range of the undiscounted amounts we could be required to pay is between $0 and $50 million.
As of the closing date of the acquisition, the contingent consideration was assigned a fair value of approximately $8 million.
Refer to Note I for additional information regarding the measurement of the contingent consideration liability.
This business expands our product offerings to our customers and our online presence under the Kraus brand.
This business is included in the Plumbing Products segment.
In connection with this acquisition, we recognized $25 million of indefinite-lived intangible assets, which is related to trademarks, and $49 million of definite-lived intangible assets, primarily related to customer relationships.
The definite-lived intangible assets are being amortized on a straight-line basis over a weighted average amortization period of 10 years.
We also recognized $20 million of goodwill, which is generally tax deductible, and is related primarily to the expected synergies from combining the operations into our business.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we acquired substantially all of the net assets of Work Tools International Inc. and Elder & Jenks, LLC (collectively, "Work Tools") for approximately $53 million, including $48 million of cash and $5 million of debt that will be paid out in 18 months less any pending or settled indemnity matters.
Work Tools will expand our product offering to our customers as it is a leading manufacturer of high-quality precision painting tools and accessories including brushes, rollers and mini rollers for DIY and professionals.
This business is included in the Decorative Architectural Products segment.
In connection with this acquisition, we recognized $7 million of indefinite-lived intangible assets, which is related to trademarks, and $27 million of definite-lived intangible assets, primarily related to customer relationships.
The definite-lived intangible assets are being amortized on a straight-line basis over a weighted average amortization period of 12 years.
We also recognized $7 million of goodwill, which is generally tax deductible, and is related primarily to the expected synergies from combining the operations into our business.
On November 10, 2020, we entered into an agreement to acquire a 75.1% equity interest in Easy Sanitary Solutions B.V. ("ESS"), for approximately €45 million ($55 million) subject to working capital and other adjustments.
ESS is the inventor, developer and manufacturer of Easy Drain shower channels and offers a wide range of products for barrier-free showering and bathroom wall niches.
A cash payment was made to a third-party notary for $52 million on December 29, 2020 for the acquisition of this equity interest in advance of the transaction closing on January 4, 2021.
The cash payment was accounted for as prepaid expenses and other in the consolidated balance sheet and included in investing cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020.50MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)B.
ACQUISITIONS (Concluded)On March 9, 2018, we acquired substantially all of the net assets of The L.D.
Kichler Co. ("Kichler"), a leader in decorative residential and light commercial lighting products, ceiling fans and LED lighting systems.
This business expands our product offerings to our customers.
The results of this acquisition for the period from the acquisition date are included in the consolidated financial statements and are reported in the Decorative Architectural Products segment.
The purchase price, net of $2 million cash acquired, consisted of $549 million paid with cash on hand.
Since the acquisition, we have revised the allocation of the purchase price to identifiable assets and liabilities based on analysis of information as of the acquisition date that has been made available in the year after acquisition.
The initial and final allocations of the fair value of the acquisition of Kichler is summarized in the following table, in millions.
InitialFinalReceivables$101 $100 Inventories173 166 Prepaid expenses and other5 5 Property and equipment33 33 Goodwill46 64 Other intangible assets243 240 Accounts payable(24)(24)Accrued liabilities(25)(30)Other liabilities(4)(5)Total$548 $549 The goodwill acquired, which is generally tax deductible, is related primarily to the operational and financial synergies we expect to derive from combining Kichler's operations into our business, as well as the assembled workforce.
The other intangible assets acquired consist of $59 million of indefinite-lived intangible assets, which is related to trademarks, and $181 million of definite-lived intangible assets.
The definite-lived intangible assets consist of $145 million related to customer relationships, which is being amortized on a straight-line basis over 20 years, and $36 million of other definite-lived intangible assets, which is being amortized over a weighted average amortization period of three years.
C. DIVESTITURESOn September 6, 2019, we completed the divestiture of our UK Window Group business ("UKWG"), a manufacturer and distributor of windows and doors, for proceeds of approximately $8 million, of which $2 million net of cash disposed was received upon sale.
The remaining $6 million was accounted for as a note receivable that is expected to be collected within two years of the divestiture.
In connection with the sale, we recognized a loss of $70 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which is included in income from discontinued operations, net in the consolidated statements of operations.On November 6, 2019, we completed the divestiture of our Milgard Windows and Doors business ("Milgard"), a manufacturer and distributor of windows and doors for proceeds of approximately $720 million, net of cash disposed.
In connection with the sale, we recognized a gain on the divestiture of $368 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which is included in income from discontinued operations, net in the consolidated statement of operations.In 2019, we determined that the previously reported Windows and Other Specialty Products segment met the criteria to be classified as a discontinued operation as a result of the combined sale of UKWG and Milgard.
These businesses represented all of our windows businesses and all remaining businesses in the Windows and Other Specialty Products segment.51MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)C. DIVESTITURES (Continued)During the second quarter of 2020, a $17 million pre-tax post-closing adjustment related to the finalization of working capital items was recorded to income from discontinued operations, net in the consolidated statement of operations, as a gain on the divestiture of Milgard.
As of December 31, 2020, we have received the $17 million in cash, which is presented in investing activities on the consolidated statement of cash flow as proceeds from disposition of businesses, net of cash disposed.
All post-closing adjustments related to our divestiture of Milgard were finalized with the buyer in the second quarter of 2020.On November 14, 2019, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell Masco Cabinetry LLC ("Cabinetry"), a manufacturer of cabinetry products.
We completed the divestiture of Cabinetry on February 18, 2020 for proceeds of approximately $989 million, including $853 million, net of cash disposed.
The remaining $136 million was accounted for as preferred stock issued by a holding company of the buyer; refer to Note I for additional information.
The working capital adjustment was finalized with the buyer in the second quarter of 2020, resulting in no significant changes to net proceeds.
In connection with the sale, we recognized a gain on the divestiture of $585 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is included in income from discontinued operations, net in the consolidated statement of operations.
We determined that the previously reported Cabinetry Products segment met the criteria to be classified as a discontinued operation as Cabinetry represented all of our cabinet businesses and all remaining businesses in the Cabinetry Products segment.We determined that the assets and liabilities for Cabinetry, Milgard and UKWG met the held for sale criteria in accordance with ASC 205-20, Discontinued Operations, during 2019.
We ceased recording depreciation and amortization for the held for sale assets upon meeting the held for sale criteria.
As the combined sale of UKWG and Milgard and the sale of Cabinetry each represented a strategic shift that will have a major effect on our operations and financial results, these businesses were presented in discontinued operations separate from continuing operations for all periods presented.
In addition, depreciation and amortization, capital expenditures, and significant non-cash operating and investing activities related to discontinued operations were separately disclosed.The results of the windows businesses recorded in (loss) income from discontinued operations before income tax was income of $2 million and $40 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2018, respectively and a loss of $1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The results of the cabinetry business recorded in (loss) income from discontinued operations before income tax was a loss of $7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and income of $107 million and $95 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.The major classes of line items constituting income from discontinued operations, net, in millions:For the Years Ended December 31, 202020192018Net sales$101 $1,528 $1,705 Cost of sales78 1,184 1,343 Gross profit23 344 362 Selling, general and administrative expenses28 232 228 Impairment charge for goodwill (A)— 7 — Other income (expense), net— 1 1 (Loss) income from discontinued operations(5)106 135 Gain on disposal of discontinued operations, net602 298 — Income before income tax597 404 135 Income tax expense(183)(108)(37)Income from discontinued operations, net$414 $296 $98 (A)
In the first quarter of 2019, we recognized a $7 million non-cash goodwill impairment charge related to a decline in the long-term outlook of our windows and doors business in the United Kingdom.52MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)C. DIVESTITURES (Concluded)The carrying amount of major classes of assets and liabilities included as part of the Cabinetry discontinued operations and reported as held for sale, were as follows, in millions:December 31, 2019Receivables$76 Prepaid expenses and other7 Inventories90 Property and equipment, net157 Operating lease right-of-use assets4 Goodwill181 Other intangible assets, net1 Other assets12 Total assets classified as held for sale$528 Accounts payable$103 Accrued liabilities46 Noncurrent operating lease liabilities3 Other liabilities10 Total liabilities classified as held for sale$162 Assets and liabilities classified as held for sale were required to be recorded at the lower of its carrying value or fair value less costs to sell.
The estimated fair value less costs to sell of the held for sale businesses exceeded their carrying value, and therefore no adjustment to these long-lived assets was necessary.Other selected financial information for Cabinetry, Milgard and UKWG during the period owned by us, were as follows, in millions:For the Years Ended December 31,202020192018Depreciation and amortization$— $29 $36 Capital expenditures1 34 38 ROU assets obtained in exchange for new lease obligations— 3 — In conjunction with the divestiture of Milgard and Cabinetry, we entered into Transition Services Agreements to provide administrative services to the buyers.
As of December 31, 2020, our Transition Service Agreement with Milgard and Cabinetry concluded.
The fees for services rendered under each of the Transition Service Agreements were not material to our results of operations.53MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)D. REVENUEOur revenues are derived primarily from sales to customers in North America and Internationally, principally Europe.
Net sales from these geographic markets, by segment, were as follows, in millions:Year Ended December 31, 2020Plumbing ProductsDecorative Architectural ProductsTotalPrimary geographic markets:North America$2,753 $3,052 $5,805 International, principally Europe1,383 — 1,383 Total$4,136 $3,052 $7,188 Year Ended December 31, 2019Plumbing ProductsDecorative Architectural ProductsTotalPrimary geographic markets:North America$2,605 $2,723 $5,328 International, principally Europe1,379 — 1,379 Total$3,984 $2,723 $6,707 Year Ended December 31, 2018Plumbing ProductsDecorative Architectural ProductsTotalPrimary geographic markets:North America$2,552 $2,656 $5,208 International, principally Europe1,446 — 1,446 Total$3,998 $2,656 $6,654 We recognized increases to revenue of $7 million, $2 million, and $4 million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, for variable consideration related to performance obligations settled in previous periods.We record contract assets for items for which we have satisfied our performance obligation but our receipt of payment is contingent upon delivery or other circumstances other than the passage of time.
Our contract assets are recorded in prepaid expenses and other in our consolidated balance sheets.
Our contract assets generally become unconditional and are reclassified to receivables in the quarter subsequent to each balance sheet date.
Our contract asset balance was $2 million at both December 31, 2020 and 2019.We record contract liabilities primarily for deferred revenue.
Our contract liabilities are recorded in accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets.
Our contract liabilities are generally recognized to net sales in the immediately subsequent reporting period.
Our contract liability balance was $62 million and $40 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.Changes in the allowance for credit losses deducted from accounts receivable were as follows, in millions: Year EndedDecember 31, 2020Balance at January 1 (after adopting ASU 2016-13)$5 Provision for expected credit losses during the period3 Write-offs charged against the allowance(2)Recoveries of amounts previously written off1 Balance at end of year$7 54MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)E. INVENTORIES(In Millions)At December 31 20202019Finished goods$552 $485 Raw materials242 211 Work in process82 58 Total$876 $754 Inventories, which include purchased parts, materials, direct labor and applied overhead, are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined by use of the first-in, first-out method.F.
LEASESWe have operating and finance leases primarily for corporate offices, manufacturing facilities, warehouses, vehicles, and equipment.
Our leases have remaining lease terms up to 22 years, some of which may include one or more renewal options with terms to extend the lease for up to an additional 20 years, and some of which may include options to terminate the leases prior to their expiration.
The components of lease cost included in income from continuing operations were as follows, in millions: 20202019Operating lease cost$47 $49 Short-term lease cost7 6 Variable lease cost3 3 Finance lease cost:Amortization of right-of-use assets3 3 Interest on lease liabilities1 1 Supplemental cash flow information related to leases was as follows, in millions 20202019Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities: Operating cash flows for operating leases$47 $58 Operating cash flows for finance leases1 1 Financing cash flows for finance leases2 8 ROU assets obtained in exchange for new lease obligations:Operating leases (A)27 27 Finance leases— — ______________________________(A)Includes $9 million of ROU assets obtained in exchange for new lease obligations related to the acquisitions of Kraus and Work Tools in the fourth quarter of 2020.
55MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)F. LEASES (Concluded)Certain other information related to leases was as follows:At December 3120202019Weighted-average remaining lease term:Operating leases10 years10 yearsFinance leases10 years11 years Weighted-average discount rate:Operating leases4.4 %4.6 %Finance leases3.3 %3.4 %Supplemental balance sheet information related to leases was as follows, in millions:At December 31, 2020At December 31, 2019Operating LeasesFinance LeasesOperating LeasesFinance LeasesProperty and equipment, net$— $27 $— $29 Notes payable— 2 — 2 Accrued liabilities39 — 38 — Long-term debt— 26 — 28 Gross ROU assets under finance leases recorded within property and equipment, net were $42 million at both December 31, 2020 and 2019, and accumulated amortization associated with these leases was $15 million and $13 million, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.At December 31, 2020, future maturities of lease liabilities were as follows, in millions:Operating LeasesFinance LeasesYear ending December 31,2021$46 $3 202237 3 202327 3 202420 4 202516 4 Thereafter89 16 Total lease payments235 33 Less: imputed interest(47)(5)Total$188 $28 Rental expense (under ASC 840) recorded in the consolidated statement of operations totaled approximately $63 million during 2018.G.
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT(In Millions)At December 31 20202019Land and improvements$66 $64 Buildings522 497 Computer hardware and software249 232 Machinery and equipment1,184 1,103 2,021 1,896 Less: Accumulated depreciation(1,113)(1,018)Total$908 $878 56MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)H. GOODWILL AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETSThe changes in the carrying amount of goodwill, by segment, were as follows, in millions: Gross Goodwill At December 31, 2020AccumulatedImpairmentLossesNet Goodwill At December 31, 2020Plumbing Products$613 $(340)$273 Decorative Architectural Products365 (75)290 Total$978 $(415)$563 Gross Goodwill At December 31, 2019AccumulatedImpairmentLossesNet Goodwill At December 31, 2019AcquisitionsOther (A)Net Goodwill At December 31, 2020Plumbing Products$566 $(340)$226 $34 $13 $273 Decorative Architectural Products358 (75)283 7 — 290 Total$924 $(415)$509 $41 $13 $563 Gross Goodwill At December 31, 2018AccumulatedImpairmentLossesNet Goodwill At December 31, 2018AcquisitionsOther (A)Net Goodwill At December 31, 2019Plumbing Products$568 $(340)$228 $— $(2)$226 Decorative Architectural Products358 (75)283 — — 283 Total$926 $(415)$511 $— $(2)$509 ______________________________(A)Other consists of the effect of foreign currency translation.Other indefinite-lived intangible assets were $109 million and $76 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and principally included registered trademarks.
As a result of our 2020 acquisitions, other indefinite-lived intangible assets increased by $32 million as of the acquisition dates.
During the first quarter of 2019, we recognized a $9 million impairment charge related to a registered trademark in our Decorative Architectural Products segment due to a change in the long-term net sales projections of lighting products.We completed our annual impairment testing of goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets in the fourth quarters of 2020, 2019 and 2018.
There was no impairment of goodwill for any of our reporting units or of our other indefinite-lived intangible assets in any of these years, other than as disclosed above.The carrying value of our definite-lived intangible assets was $248 million (net of accumulated amortization of $73 million) at December 31, 2020 and $183 million (net of accumulated amortization of $48 million) at December 31, 2019 and principally included customer relationships with a weighted average amortization period of 15 years in 2020 and 17 years in 2019.
Amortization expense, including discontinued operations, related to the definite-lived intangible assets was $24 million, $23 million and $20 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
As a result of our 2020 acquisitions, definite-lived intangible assets increased by $86 million, as of the acquisition dates.At December 31, 2020, amortization expense related to the definite-lived intangible assets during each of the next five years was as follows: 2021 – $27 million; 2022 – $23 million; 2023 – $22 million, 2024 – $22 million and 2025 –$17 million.57MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)I.
FAIR VALUE OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTSPreferred Stock of ACProducts Holding, Inc.
In conjunction with our divestiture of Cabinetry, we received preferred stock of ACProducts Holding, Inc., the holding company of the buyer, with a liquidation preference of $150 million.
The preferred stock has a coupon of 8 percent until the first anniversary of issuance, 9 percent after the first anniversary and until the second anniversary of issuance, and 10 percent after the second anniversary of issuance and until the seventh anniversary of issuance.
After which, the rate will increase by 50 basis points up to a maximum of 15 percent for each annual period occurring during and after the seventh anniversary until all shares have been redeemed in full.We do not have the ability to exercise significant influence, and the fair value of the preferred stock is not readily available.
We elected to measure this investment at cost (less impairment, if any) adjusted for observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or similar investments of the same issuer for subsequent measurements of fair value.
As the preferred stock was received in conjunction with the sale of Cabinetry, we determined the cost to be the fair value of the preferred stock at the time of sale.The fair value of the preferred stock was measured on a non-recurring basis, and estimated using discounted cash flow and option pricing models (Level 3 inputs).
The significant unobservable inputs used to value the preferred stock included: time to exit (deemed maturity) since the preferred stock is not mandatorily redeemable, discount rate used to determine the present value of expected cash flows, which included the spread on company specific debt and the risk-free rate of return, the liquidation preference and the coupon rate.
On the date of acquisition, the fair value of this investment was determined to be $136 million and was included in other assets in our consolidated balance sheet.Dividends earned on this investment are included within other income (expense), net in our consolidated statement of operations with a corresponding increase to our basis in the investment.
We had dividend income of $10 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
As such, the preferred stock was reported at the carrying value of $146 million in other assets in our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020.Kraus Acquisition Contingent Consideration.
As described in Note B, we may be obligated to pay up to an additional $50 million for the Kraus acquisition.
The fair value of the liability was estimated to be $8 million as of December 31, 2020, the acquisition date, using probability weighted discounted cash flows and a discount rate that reflects the uncertainty surrounding the expected outcomes, which we believe is appropriate and representative of a market participant assumption.
This amount was included within the purchase consideration and will be remeasured at fair value as of each reporting date until the obligation is settled.
The measurement of the liability for contingent consideration is based on significant inputs that are not observable in the market, and is therefore classified as Level 3 inputs.
Examples of utilized unobservable inputs are estimated future revenues and earnings of the acquired business and an applicable discount rate.
The estimate of the liability may fluctuate if there are changes in the forecast of the acquired business' future revenues and earnings, as a result of actual levels achieved or in the discount rate used to determine the present value of contingent future cash flows.
Any subsequent remeasurement of the estimate will be recorded in other, net within other income (expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations.Fair Value of Debt.
The fair value of our short-term and long-term fixed-rate debt instruments is based principally upon modeled market prices for the same or similar issues, which are Level 1 inputs.
The aggregate estimated market value of our short-term and long-term debt at December 31, 2020 was approximately $3.3 billion, compared with the aggregate carrying value of $2.8 billion.
The aggregate estimated market value of our short-term and long-term debt at December 31, 2019 was approximately $3.0 billion, compared with the aggregate carrying value of $2.8 billion.58MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)J.
OTHER ASSETS(In Millions)At December 31 20202019Preferred stock of ACProducts Holding, Inc. (Note I)$146 $— Equity method investments11 11 In-store displays, net1 5 Deferred tax assets (Note S)109 99 Other27 24 Total$294 $139 We recognized amortization expense, including discontinued operations, related to in-store displays of $2 million, $12 million and $21 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Cash spent for displays was $11 million and $10 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively, and is included in other, net within investing activities on the consolidated statements of cash flows.K.
ACCRUED LIABILITIES(In Millions)At December 31 20202019Salaries, wages and commissions$193 $141 Advertising and sales promotion293 189 Interest35 36 Warranty (Note U)34 31 Employee retirement plans182 41 Insurance reserves29 37 Property, payroll and other taxes32 18 Dividends payable36 37 Deferred revenue62 40 Product returns23 25 Operating lease liabilities (Note F)39 38 Other80 67 Total$1,038 $700 59MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)L. DEBT(In Millions)At December 31 20202019Notes and debentures: 3.500%, due April 1, 2021$— $399 5.950%, due March 15, 2022326 326 4.450%, due April 1, 2025500 500 4.375%, due April 1, 2026498 498 3.500%, due November 15, 2027300 300 7.750%, due August 1, 2029235 235 2.000%, due October 1, 2030300 — 6.500%, due August 15, 2032200 200 4.500%, due May 15, 2047418 299 Other33 30 Prepaid debt issuance costs(15)(14)2,795 2,773 Less: Current portion3 2 Total long-term debt$2,792 $2,771 All of the notes and debentures above are senior indebtedness and, other than the 7.75% Notes due 2029, are redeemable at our option.
On September 18, 2020, we issued $300 million of 2.0% Notes due October 1, 2030 (the "2030 Notes") and received proceeds of $300 million, net of discount, for the issuance of the 2030 Notes.
Also on September 18, 2020, we issued an incremental $100 million of our existing 4.5% Notes due May 15, 2047 (the "2047 Notes") and received proceeds of $119 million, including a premium, for the issuance of the 2047 Notes.
The incremental $100 million formed a single series with the existing $300 million of 4.5% Notes due May 15, 2047.
The 2030 Notes and 2047 Notes are senior indebtedness and are redeemable at our option at the applicable redemption price.
On September 29, 2020, proceeds from the debt issuances were used to repay and early retire $400 million of our 3.5% Notes due April 1, 2021.
In connection with this early retirement, we incurred a loss on debt extinguishment of $6 million, which was recorded as interest expense in our consolidated statement of operations.On December 19, 2019, proceeds from the UKWG and Milgard divestitures were used to repay and early retire $201 million of our 7.125% Notes due March 15, 2020.
In connection with this early retirement, we incurred a loss on debt extinguishment of $2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was recorded as interest expense in our consolidated statement of operations.On April 16, 2018, we repaid and retired all of our $114 million, 6.625% Notes on the scheduled repayment date.
On March 13, 2019, we entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with an aggregate commitment of $1.0 billion and a maturity date of March 13, 2024.
Under the Credit Agreement, at our request and subject to certain conditions, we can increase the aggregate commitment up to an additional $500 million with the current lenders or new lenders.
Upon entry into the Credit Agreement, our credit agreement dated March 28, 2013, as amended, with an aggregate commitment of $750 million, was terminated.The Credit Agreement provides for an unsecured revolving credit facility available to us and one of our foreign subsidiaries, in U.S. dollars, European euros, British Pounds Sterling, Canadian dollars and certain other currencies for revolving credit loans, swingline loans and letters of credit.
Borrowings under the revolving credit loans denominated in any agreed upon currency other than U.S. dollars are limited to $500 million, equivalent.
We can also borrow swingline loans up to $100 million and obtain letters of credit of up to $25 million; outstanding letters of credit under the Credit Agreement reduce our borrowing capacity.
At December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding standby letters of credit under the Credit Agreement.60MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)L. DEBT (Concluded)Revolving credit loans bear interest under the Credit Agreement, at our option, at (A) a rate per annum equal to the greater of (i) the JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.
prime rate, (ii) the Federal Reserve Bank of New York effective rate plus 0.50% and (iii) if available, adjusted LIBO Rate plus 1.0% (the "Alternative Base Rate"); plus an applicable margin based upon our then-applicable corporate credit ratings; or (B) if available, adjusted LIBO Rate plus an applicable margin based upon our then-applicable corporate credit ratings.
The foreign currency revolving credit loans bear interest at a rate equal to adjusted LIBO Rate, if available, plus an applicable margin based upon our then-applicable corporate credit ratings.The Credit Agreement contains financial covenants requiring us to maintain (A) a net leverage ratio, as adjusted for certain items, not exceeding 4.0 to 1.0, and (B) a minimum interest coverage ratio, as adjusted for certain items, not less than 2.5 to 1.0.In order for us to borrow under the Credit Agreement, there must not be any default in our covenants in the Credit Agreement (i.e., in addition to the two financial covenants, principally limitations on subsidiary debt, negative pledge restrictions, legal compliance requirements and maintenance of properties and insurance) and our representations and warranties in the Credit Agreement must be true in all material respects on the date of borrowing (i.e., principally no material adverse change or litigation likely to result in a material adverse change, since December 31, 2018, no material ERISA or environmental non-compliance, and no material tax deficiency).
We were in compliance with all covenants and no borrowings were outstanding at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, the debt maturities during each of the next five years were as follows: 2021 – $3 million; 2022– $334 million; 2023 – $3 million; 2024 – $3 million and 2025 – $503 million.Interest paid was $136 million, $157 million and $155 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
These amounts exclude $5 million and $2 million of debt extinguishment costs related to the early retirement of debt, which were recorded as interest expense and paid in 2020 and 2019, respectively.M.
STOCK-BASED COMPENSATIONOur 2014 Long Term Stock Incentive Plan (the "2014 Plan") provides for the issuance of stock-based incentives in various forms to our employees and non-employee Directors.
At December 31, 2020, outstanding stock-based incentives were in the form of long-term stock awards, stock options, restricted stock units, performance restricted stock units and phantom stock awards.Pre-tax compensation expense (income) included in income from continuing operations for these stock-based incentives was as follows, in millions: 202020192018Long-term stock awards$14 $20 $20 Stock options7 4 3 Restricted stock units13 — — Performance restricted stock units5 3 4 Phantom stock awards and stock appreciation rights4 4 (2)Total$43 $31 $25 At December 31, 2020, 13.4 million shares of our common stock were available under the 2014 Plan for the granting of long-term stock awards, stock options, restricted stock units and performance restricted stock units.61MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)M. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION (Continued)Long-Term Stock Awards.
Prior to the amendment of our 2014 Plan in December 2019, we granted long-term stock awards to our key employees and non-employee Directors.
These grants did not cause net share dilution due to our practice of repurchasing and retiring an equal number of shares in the open market.
We did not grant shares of long-term stock awards during 2020.Our long-term stock award activity was as follows, shares in millions:202020192018Unvested stock award shares at January 12 2 3 Weighted average grant date fair value$34 $30 $24 Stock award shares granted— 1 1 Weighted average grant date fair value$— $36 $41 Stock award shares vested1 1 2 Weighted average grant date fair value$32 $25 $21 Stock award shares forfeited— — — Weighted average grant date fair value$35 $35 $31 Unvested stock award shares at December 311 2 2 Weighted average grant date fair value$36 $34 $30 At December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, there was $21 million, $41 million and $46 million, respectively, of total unrecognized compensation expense related to unvested stock awards; such awards had a weighted average remaining vesting period of two years at December 31, 2020 and three years at both December 31, 2019 and 2018.The total market value (at the vesting date) of stock award shares which vested during both 2020 and 2019 was $31 million and during 2018 was $56 million.62MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)M. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION (Continued)Stock Options.
Stock options are granted to certain key employees.
The exercise price equals the market price of our common stock at the grant date and expire no later than 10 years after the grant date.We granted 420,840 shares of stock options during 2020 with a grant date weighted-average exercise price of approximately $48 per share.
During 2020, 60,838 stock option shares were forfeited (including options that expired unexercised).Our stock option activity was as follows, shares in millions:202020192018Option shares outstanding, January 13 4 5 Weighted average exercise price$27 $21 $16 Option shares granted1 1 — Weighted average exercise price$48 $36 $42 Option shares exercised2 2 1 Aggregate intrinsic value on date of exercise (A)$29 million$33 million$55 millionWeighted average exercise price$17 $13 $11 Option shares forfeited— — — Weighted average exercise price$40 $34 $31 Option shares outstanding, December 312 3 4 Weighted average exercise price$33 $27 $21 Weighted average remaining option term (in years)665Option shares vested and expected to vest, December 312 3 4 Weighted average exercise price$33 $27 $21 Aggregate intrinsic value (A)$51 million$63 million$36 millionWeighted average remaining option term (in years)665Option shares exercisable (vested), December 311 2 3 Weighted average exercise price$28 $21 $16 Aggregate intrinsic value (A)$35 million$47 million$34 millionWeighted average remaining option term (in years)544______________________________(A)Aggregate intrinsic value is calculated using our stock price at each respective date, less the exercise price (grant date price) multiplied by the number of shares.At December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, there was $6 million, $9 million and $8 million, respectively, of unrecognized compensation expense (using the Black-Scholes option pricing model at the grant date) related to unvested stock options; such options had a weighted average remaining vesting period of two years at December 31, 2020 and three years at both December 31, 2019 and 2018.The weighted average grant date fair value of option shares granted and the assumptions used to estimate those values using a Black-Scholes option pricing model were as follows:202020192018Weighted average grant date fair value$10.67 $8.81 $12.34 Risk-free interest rate1.53 %2.57 %2.72 %Dividend yield1.14 %1.35 %1.02 %Volatility factor24.00 %25.00 %29.00 %Expected option life6 years6 years6 years63MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)M. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION (Concluded)The following table summarizes information for stock option shares outstanding and exercisable at December 31, 2020, shares in millions:Option Shares OutstandingOption Shares ExercisableRange ofPricesNumber ofSharesWeightedAverageRemainingOption TermWeightedAverageExercisePriceNumber ofSharesWeightedAverageExercisePrice$10 - 18—2 years$18—$18$19 - 3415 years$261$25$35 - 4818 years$41—$39$ 10 - 4826 years$331$28Restricted Stock Units.
Restricted stock units are granted to our key employees and non-employee Directors.
These grants did not cause net share dilution due to our practice of repurchasing and retiring an equal number of shares in the open market.
The grant date fair value is based on the fair value of our common stock.
We granted 445,670 restricted stock units during 2020 with a weighted average grant date fair value of $47 per share.
In 2020, 11,100 restricted stock units were forfeited.
At December 31, 2020, there was $7 million of unrecognized compensation expense related to unvested restricted stock units; such units had a weighted average remaining vesting period of two years.Performance Restricted Stock Units.
Under our Long Term Incentive Program, we grant performance restricted stock units to certain senior executives.
These performance restricted stock units will vest and share awards will be issued at no cost to the employees, subject to our achievement of specified return on invested capital performance goals, and beginning with the 2020 grant, an additional earning per share metric over a three-year period that have been established by our Compensation Committee for the performance period.
To receive the award, the recipient must be employed through the share award date.
Performance restricted stock units are granted at a target number; based on our performance, the number of performance restricted stock units that vest can be adjusted downward to zero and upward to a maximum of 200% of the target number.
During 2020, we granted 133,390 performance restricted stock units with a grant date fair value of approximately $34 per share, 151,724 performance restricted stock units were issued and 10,680 performance restricted stock units were forfeited.
At December 31, 2020, there were 102,990 shares vested, but unissued.
During 2019, we granted 126,680 performance restricted stock units with a grant date fair value of approximately $39 per share, and 15,600 performance restricted stock units were forfeited.
During 2018, we granted 113,260 performance restricted stock units with a grant date fair value of approximately $42 per share, and 11,600 performance restricted stock units were forfeited.
Phantom Stock Awards and Stock Appreciation Rights.
Certain non-U.S. employees are granted phantom stock awards and historically have been granted SARs.We recognized expense of $4 million in both 2020 and 2019, and income of $1 million in 2018 related to phantom stock awards.
In 2020, 2019 and 2018, we granted 82,630, 79,500, and 98,140 shares, respectively, of phantom stock awards with an aggregate fair value of $3 million in both 2020 and 2019 and $4 million in 2018, and paid cash of $3 million in both 2020 and 2019, and $6 million in 2018 to settle phantom stock awards.Information related to phantom stock awards was as follows, in millions: At December 31, 20202019Accrued compensation cost liability$6 $5 Unrecognized compensation cost$4 $3 Equivalent common shares— — We recognized income of $1 million in 2018 related to SARs.
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, we did not grant any SARs.
We paid cash of $2 million, and $5 million in 2019, and 2018, respectively, to settle SARs.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no outstanding SARs.64MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)N. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANSWe sponsor qualified defined-benefit and defined-contribution retirement plans for most of our employees.
In addition to our qualified defined-benefit pension plans, we have unfunded non-qualified defined-benefit pension plans covering certain employees and former employees, which provide for benefits in addition to those provided by the qualified pension plans.
Substantially all salaried employees participate in non-contributory defined-contribution retirement plans, to which payments are determined annually by the Compensation Committee.Pre-tax expense included in income from continuing operations related to our retirement plans was as follows, in millions: 202020192018Defined-contribution plans$46 $40 $37 Defined-benefit pension plans38 24 17 $84 $64 $54 As of January 1, 2010, substantially all our domestic and foreign qualified and domestic non-qualified defined-benefit pension plans were frozen to future benefit accruals.
In December 2019, our Board of Directors approved a resolution to terminate our qualified domestic defined-benefit pension plans.
As a result of this decision, the projected benefit obligations for these plans were increased to reflect the incremental cost to terminate the plans.
Changes in the projected benefit obligation and fair value of plan assets, and the funded status of our defined-benefit pension plans were as follows, in millions: 20202019 QualifiedNon-QualifiedQualifiedNon-QualifiedChanges in projected benefit obligation:
Projected benefit obligation at January 1$1,034 $161 $896 $155 Service cost3 — 3 — Interest cost23 5 33 6 Actuarial loss, net85 10 149 13 Foreign currency exchange18 — (3)— Benefit payments(45)(13)(44)(13)Divestitures— (1)— — Projected benefit obligation at December 31$1,118 $162 $1,034 $161 Changes in fair value of plan assets:
Fair value of plan assets at January 1$780 $— $670 $— Actual return on plan assets67 — 105 — Foreign currency exchange8 — (1)— Company contributions57 13 56 13 Expenses, other(4)— (6)— Benefit payments(45)(13)(44)(13)Fair value of plan assets at December 31$863 $— $780 $— Funded status at December 31$(255)$(162)$(254)$(161)65MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)N. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANS (Continued)Amounts in our consolidated balance sheets were as follows, in millions: At December 31, 2020At December 31, 2019 QualifiedNon-QualifiedQualifiedNon-QualifiedOther assets$1 $— $1 $— Accrued liabilities (A)(135)(12)(1)(13)Other liabilities (A)(121)(150)(254)(148)Total net liability$(255)$(162)$(254)$(161)______________________________(A)As a result of the planned termination of the qualified domestic defined-benefit pension plans in 2021, the liabilities associated with these plans have been reported as current liabilities at December 31, 2020.Unrealized loss included in accumulated other comprehensive loss before income taxes was as follows, in millions: At December 31, 2020At December 31, 2019 QualifiedNon-QualifiedQualifiedNon-QualifiedNet loss$540 $65 $520 $57 Net prior service cost3 — 4 — Total$543 $65 $524 $57 Information for defined-benefit pension plans with an accumulated benefit obligation in excess of plan assets was as follows, in millions: At December 31 20202019 QualifiedNon-QualifiedQualifiedNon-QualifiedProjected benefit obligation$1,100 $162 $1,019 $161 Accumulated benefit obligation1,100 162 1,019 161 Fair value of plan assets844 — 763 — The projected benefit obligation was in excess of plan assets for all of our qualified defined-benefit pension plans at December 31, 2020 and 2019 which had an accumulated benefit obligation in excess of plan assets.Net periodic pension cost for our defined-benefit pension plans, with the exception of service cost, is recorded in other income (expense), net, in our consolidated statement of operations.
Net periodic pension cost for our defined-benefit pension plans was as follows, in millions: 202020192018 QualifiedNon-QualifiedQualifiedNon-QualifiedQualifiedNon-QualifiedService cost$3 $— $3 $— $3 $— Interest cost28 5 39 6 36 6 Expected return on plan assets(24)— (44)— (48)— Recognized prior service cost1 — — — — — Recognized net loss22 3 18 2 17 3 Net periodic pension cost$30 $8 $16 $8 $8 $9 66MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)N. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANS (Continued)We expect to recognize $464 million of pre-tax net loss from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net periodic pension cost in 2021 related to our defined-benefit pension plans.
This includes the full recognition of accumulated actuarial losses for our qualified domestic defined-benefit pension plans upon its expected termination.
For plans in which almost all of the plan's participants are inactive, pre-tax net loss within accumulated other comprehensive loss is amortized using the straight-line method over the remaining life expectancy of the inactive plan participants.
For plans which do not have almost all inactive participants, pre-tax net loss within accumulated other comprehensive loss is amortized using the straight-line method over the average remaining service period of the active employees expected to receive benefits from the plan.Plan Assets.
Our qualified defined-benefit pension plan weighted average asset allocation, which is based upon fair value, was as follows: 20202019Equity securities15 %41 %Debt securities49 %54 %Other36 %5 %Total100 %100 %For our qualified defined-benefit pension plans, we have adopted accounting guidance that defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and prescribes disclosures about fair value measurements.
Accounting guidance defines fair value as "the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
"Following is a description of the valuation methodologies used for assets measured at fair value.
There have been no changes in the methodologies used at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019.Common and Preferred Stocks and Short-Term and Other Investments: Valued at the closing price reported on the active market on which the individual securities are traded or based on the active market for similar securities.
Certain investments are valued based on net asset value ("NAV"), which approximates fair value.
Such basis is determined by referencing the respective fund's underlying assets.
There are no unfunded commitments or other restrictions associated with these investments.Private Equity and Hedge Funds: Valued based on an estimated fair value using either a market approach or an income approach, both of which require a significant degree of judgment.
There is no active trading market for these investments and they are generally illiquid.
Due to the significant unobservable inputs, the fair value measurements used to estimate fair value are a Level 3 input.Corporate, Government and Other Debt Securities: Valued based on either the closing price reported on the active market on which the individual securities are traded or using pricing models maximizing the use of observable inputs for similar securities.
This includes basing value on yields currently available on comparable securities of issuers with similar credit ratings.
Certain investments are valued based on NAV, which approximates fair value.
Such basis is determined by referencing the respective fund's underlying assets.
There are no unfunded commitments or other restrictions associated with these investments.
Common Collective Trust Fund: Valued based on an amortized cost basis, which approximates fair value.
Such basis is determined by reference to the respective fund's underlying assets, which are primarily cash equivalents.
There are no unfunded commitments or other restrictions associated with this fund.Buy-in Annuity: Valued based on the associated benefit obligation for which the buy-in annuity covers the benefits, which approximates fair value.
Such basis is determined based on various assumptions, including the discount rate, long-term rate of return on plan assets and mortality rate.The methods described above may produce a fair value calculation that may not be indicative of net realizable value or reflective of future fair values.
Furthermore, while we believe our valuation methods are appropriate and consistent with other market participants, the use of different methodologies or assumptions to determine the fair value of certain financial instruments could result in a different fair value measurement at the reporting date.67MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)N. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANS (Continued)The following tables set forth, by level within the fair value hierarchy, the qualified defined-benefit pension plan assets at fair value as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, as well as those valued at NAV using the practical expedient, which approximates fair value, in millions.
At December 31, 2020 Level 1Level 2Level 3Valued at NAVTotalPlan AssetsCommon and Preferred Stocks:United States$26 $— $— $87 $113 International15 — — — 15 Private Equity and Hedge Funds – International— — 1 — 1 Corporate Debt Securities:United States— 143 — — 143 International— 23 — — 23 Government and Other Debt Securities:United States— 214 — — 214 International— 46 — — 46 Common Collective Trust Fund – United States— 292 — — 292 Buy-in Annuity - International— 14 — — 14 Short-Term and Other Investments – International2 — — — 2 Total Plan Assets$43 $732 $1 $87 $863 At December 31, 2019 Level 1Level 2Level 3Valued at NAVTotalPlan AssetsCommon and Preferred Stocks:United States$85 $— $— $82 $167 International47 — — 110 157 Private Equity and Hedge Funds:United States— — 2 — 2 International— — 17 — 17 Corporate Debt Securities:United States74 — — 124 198 International— 1 — — 1 Government and Other Debt Securities:United States— 3 — 148 151 International29 38 — — 67 Common Collective Trust Fund – United States— 4 — — 4 Buy-in Annuity - International— 12 — — 12 Short-Term and Other Investments: United States2 — — — 2 International2 — — — 2 Total Plan Assets$239 $58 $19 $464 $780 68MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)N. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANS (Continued)Changes in the fair value of the qualified defined-benefit pension plan Level 3 assets, were as follows, in millions: 20202019Fair Value, January 1$19 $59 Purchases— 4 Sales(18)(41)Unrealized losses— (3)Fair Value, December 31$1 $19 Assumptions.
Weighted average major assumptions used in accounting for our defined-benefit pension plans were as follows:202020192018Discount rate for obligations1.70 %2.50 %3.80 %Expected return on plan assets2.00 %3.00 %7.00 %Rate of compensation increase— %— %— %Discount rate for net periodic pension cost2.50 %3.80 %3.30 %The discount rate for obligations for 2020, 2019 and 2018 is based primarily upon the expected duration of each defined-benefit pension plan's liabilities matched to the December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 Willis Towers Watson Rate Link Curve.
At December 31, 2020, such rates for our defined-benefit pension plans ranged from 0.7 percent to 2.1 percent, with the most significant portion of the liabilities having a discount rate for obligations of 1.6 percent or higher.
At December 31, 2019, such rates for our defined-benefit pension plans ranged from 1.1 percent to 3.0 percent, with the most significant portion of the liabilities having a discount rate for obligations of 2.4 percent or higher.
At December 31, 2018, such rates for our defined‑benefit pension plans ranged from 1.5 percent to 4.2 percent, with the most significant portion of the liabilities having a discount rate for obligations of 4.1 percent or higher.
The decrease in the weighted average discount rate from 2019 to 2020 is principally due to lower long-term interest rates in the bond markets.
The decrease in the weighted average discount rate from 2018 to 2019 is principally the corresponding cost to terminate the domestic qualified defined-benefit pension plans, as well as, lower long-term interest rates in the bond markets.For 2020, we chose to set the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets equal to the discount rate for each domestic qualified defined-benefit pension plan, net of investment fees but not administrative expenses.
The discount rate approximated the long-term expected rate of return provided by our investment consultants as a result of the decision to terminate these plans in 2021 and the plan assets comprised mostly of fixed income and cash.
For 2020 our weighted average projected long-term rate of return on plan assets for the foreign qualified defined-benefit pension plans was 2.9 percent.
For 2019 and 2018, our projected long-term rate of return on plan assets were 3.00 percent and 7.00 percent, respectively.
The actual annual rate of return on our pension plan assets was positive 9.7 percent, positive 17.7 percent and negative 4.9 percent in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
For the 10-year period ended December 31, 2020, the actual annual rate of return on our pension plan assets was 7.2 percent.
The investment objectives seek to minimize the volatility of the value of our plan assets relative to pension liabilities and to ensure plan assets are sufficient to pay plan benefits.
In 2020, we made substantial progress toward achieving our targeted asset allocation: 60 percent fixed-income and 40 percent cash, as we prepare to distribute funds for the upcoming settlement of the qualified domestic defined-benefit pension plans.
In the first quarter of 2021 we anticipate that a lump sum payment window will open and following that any remaining liabilities of the plan are anticipated to be transferred to an insurer through the purchase of an annuity contract by a third party administrator.69MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)N. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANS (Concluded)The asset allocation of the investment portfolio was developed with the objective of achieving our expected rate of return and reducing volatility of asset returns, and considered the freezing of future benefits.
The fixed-income portfolio is invested in corporate bonds, bond index funds and U.S. Treasury securities.
Although we would expect alternative investments to yield a higher rate of return than the targeted overall long-term return, these investments are subject to greater volatility and would be less liquid than financial instruments that trade on public markets.
As such, and as a result of the decision to terminate the domestic qualified defined-benefit pension plans, we sold most of our alternative investments.
The fair value of our plan assets is subject to risk including significant concentrations of risk in our plan assets related to equity, interest rate and operating risk.
In order to ensure plan assets are sufficient to pay benefits, a portion of our foreign qualified plans' assets are allocated to equity investments that are expected, over time, to earn higher returns with more volatility than fixed-income investments which more closely match pension liabilities.
Within equity, risk is mitigated by targeting a portfolio that is broadly diversified by geography, market capitalization, manager mandate size, investment style and process.In order to minimize asset volatility relative to the liabilities, a significant portion of plan assets are allocated to fixed-income investments that are exposed to interest rate risk.
Rate increases generally will result in a decline in fixed-income assets, while reducing the present value of the liabilities.
Conversely, rate decreases will increase fixed income assets, partially offsetting the related increase in the liabilities.Potential events or circumstances that could have a negative effect on estimated fair value include the risks of inadequate diversification and other operating risks.
To mitigate these risks, investments are diversified across and within asset classes in support of investment objectives.
Policies and practices to address operating risks include ongoing manager oversight, plan and asset class investment guidelines and instructions that are communicated to managers, and periodic compliance and audit reviews to ensure adherence to these policies.
In addition, we periodically seek the input of our independent advisor to ensure the investment policy is appropriate.Other.
We sponsor certain post-retirement benefit plans that provide medical, dental and life insurance coverage for eligible retirees and dependents based upon age and length of service.
Substantially all of these plans were frozen as of January 1, 2010.
The aggregate present value of the unfunded accumulated post-retirement benefit obligation was $10 million at both December 31, 2020 and 2019.Cash Flows.
At December 31, 2020, we expect to contribute approximately $140 million to our domestic qualified defined-benefit pension plans in 2021, which will exceed ERISA requirements and effectively settle these plans.
We also expect to contribute approximately $1 million and $12 million in 2021 to our foreign and non-qualified (domestic) defined-benefit pension plans, respectively.At December 31, 2020, the benefits expected to be paid in each of the next five years, and in aggregate for the five years thereafter, relating to our defined-benefit pension plans, were as follows, in millions:QualifiedPlansNon-QualifiedPlans2021 (A)$895 $12 20225 12 20236 12 20246 12 20256 12 2026 - 203038 50 _______________________(A)The qualified benefit payments include the projected benefit obligations of the qualified domestic defined-benefit pension plans we plan to settle in 2021.70MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)O.
SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITYIn September 2019, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase, for retirement, of up to $2.0 billion of shares of our common stock in open-market transactions or otherwise.
During 2020, we repurchased and retired 18.8 million shares of our common stock (including 0.4 million shares to offset the dilutive impact of restricted stock units granted in 2020), for cash aggregating $727 million.
At December 31, 2020, we had $774 million remaining under the 2019 authorization.
Our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase, for retirement, of up to $2.0 billion shares of our common stock in open-market transactions or otherwise, effective February 10, 2021, replacing the 2019 authorization.During 2019, we repurchased and retired 20.1 million shares of our common stock (including 0.6 million shares to offset the dilutive impact of long-term stock awards granted in 2019) for cash aggregating $896 million.
During 2018, we repurchased and retired 18.6 million shares of our common stock (including 0.7 million shares to offset the dilutive impact of long-term stock awards granted in 2018) for cash aggregating $654 million.On the basis of amounts paid (declared), cash dividends per common share were $0.545 ($0.550) in 2020, $0.495 ($0.510) in 2019 and $0.435 ($0.450) in 2018.Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss.
The components of accumulated other comprehensive loss attributable to Masco Corporation were as follows, in millions: At December 31 20202019Cumulative translation adjustments, net$325 $273 Unrealized loss on interest rate swaps, net(7)(8)Unrecognized net loss and prior service cost, net(460)(444)Accumulated other comprehensive loss$(142)$(179)The cumulative translation adjustment, net, is reported net of income tax benefit of $1 million at both December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The unrealized loss on interest rate swaps, net, is reported net of income tax expense of $5 million and $4 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The unrecognized net loss and prior service cost, net, is reported net of income tax benefit of $124 million and $117 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
71MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)P. RECLASSIFICATIONS FROM ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE LOSSThe reclassifications from accumulated other comprehensive loss to the consolidated statements of operations were as follows, in millions:Accumulated OtherComprehensive Loss202020192018Statement of Operations Line ItemAmortization of defined-benefit pension and other post-retirement benefits:Actuarial losses, net and prior service cost$26 $20 $20 Other income (expense), netTax (benefit)(7)(5)(5) Net of tax$19 $15 $15 Interest rate swaps$2 $2 $2 Interest expenseTax (benefit)(1)— — Net of tax$1 $2 $2 In addition to the above amounts, we reclassified $9 million of deferred currency translation losses from accumulated other comprehensive loss to the consolidated statement of operations in conjunction with the liquidation of certain UK dormant entities upon receiving final regulatory approval in 2020.
Additionally, we reclassified $14 million of deferred currency translation losses from accumulated other comprehensive loss to the consolidated statement of operations in conjunction with the disposition of UKWG in September 2019.
In addition, as of March 31, 2018, we adopted ASU 2018-02, "Income Statement-Reporting Comprehensive Income (Topic 220): Reclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income."
As a result of the adoption, we reclassified $59 million of the disproportionate tax benefit related to various defined-benefit plans from accumulated other comprehensive loss to retained earnings (deficit).Q.
SEGMENT INFORMATIONOur reportable segments are as follows:Plumbing Products – principally includes faucets, plumbing system components and valves, showerheads and handheld showers, bath hardware and accessories, bath units, tubs and shower bases and enclosures, sinks, toilets, spas, exercise pools and fitness systems and water handling systems.Decorative Architectural Products – principally includes paints and other coating products, paint applicators and accessories, lighting fixtures, ceiling fans, landscape lighting and LED lighting systems, and cabinet and other hardware.The above products are sold to the residential repair and remodel and to a lesser extent the new home construction markets through home center retailers, online retailers, wholesalers and distributors, mass merchandisers, hardware stores, direct to the consumer and homebuilders.Our operations are principally located in North America and Europe.
Our country of domicile is the United States of America.Other than those assets specifically identified within a segment, corporate assets consist primarily of property and equipment, right-of-use assets, deferred tax assets, cash and cash investments and other investments.Our segments are based upon similarities in products and represent the aggregation of operating units, for which financial information is regularly evaluated by our corporate operating executive in determining resource allocation and assessing performance, and is periodically reviewed by the Board of Directors.
Accounting policies for the segments are the same as those for us.
We primarily evaluate performance based upon operating profit and, other than general corporate expense, allocate specific corporate overhead to each segment.As described in Note C, our previously reported Windows and Other Specialty Products as well as Cabinetry Products segments were classified as discontinued operations in 2019.72MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)Q.
SEGMENT INFORMATION (Concluded)Information by segment and geographic area was as follows, in millions: Net Sales(1)(2)(3)(4)Operating Profit(5)Assets atDecember 31 (6) 202020192018202020192018202020192018Our operations by segment were:
 Plumbing Products$4,136 $3,984 $3,998 $806 $708 $715 $2,822 $2,375 $2,253 Decorative Architectural Products3,052 2,723 2,656 583 480 456 1,633 1,526 1,534 Total$7,188 $6,707 $6,654 $1,389 $1,188 $1,171 $4,455 $3,901 $3,787 Our operations by geographic area were:
 North America$5,805 $5,328 $5,208 $1,167 $987 $954 $3,101 $2,785 $2,729 International, principally Europe1,383 1,379 1,446 222 201 217 1,354 1,116 1,058 Total, as above$7,188 $6,707 $6,654 1,389 1,188 1,171 4,455 3,901 3,787 General corporate expense, net (5)(94)(100)(94) Operating profit, as reported1,295 1,088 1,077
Other income (expense), net(164)(174)(170) Income from continuing operations before income taxes$1,131 $914 $907
Corporate assets 1,322 598 411 Assets held for sale— 528 1,195 Total assets $5,777 $5,027 $5,393 Property Additions (7)Depreciation andAmortization 202020192018202020192018Our operations by segment were:Plumbing Products$86 $108 $120 $84 $80 $77 Decorative Architectural Products25 18 54 41 41 35 111 126 174 125 121 112 Unallocated amounts, principally related to corporate assets2 2 7 8 9 8 Discontinued operations1 34 38 — 29 36 Total$114 $162 $219 $133 $159 $156 ______________________________(1)Included in net sales were export sales from the U.S. of $274 million, $244 million and $237 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(2)Excluded from net sales were intra-company sales between segments of less than one percent in 2020, 2019 and 2018.
(3)Included in net sales were sales to one customer of $2,812 million, $2,481 million and $2,457 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Such net sales were included in each of our segments.
(4)Net sales from our operations in the U.S. were $5,592 million, $5,127 million and $5,034 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(5)General corporate expense, net included those expenses not specifically attributable to our segments.
(6)Long-lived assets of our operations in the U.S. and Europe were $1,301 million and $522 million, $1,198 million and $470 million, and $1,119 million and $446 million at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(7)Property additions exclude amounts paid for long-lived assets as part of acquisitions.
Refer to Note B for further information.73MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)R. OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE), NETOther, net, which is included in other income (expense), net, was as follows, in millions: 202020192018Income from cash and cash investments and short-term bank deposits$3 $3 $5 Equity investment income, net3 1 3 Realized gains from private equity funds— — 1 Foreign currency transaction (losses) gains (1)(10)2 (8)Net periodic pension and post-retirement benefit cost(35)(21)(14)Dividend income10 — — Other items, net (2)9 — (1)Total other, net$(20)$(15)$(14)_________________________________________________(1)Included in foreign currency transaction (losses) gains for 2020 was a $9 million deferred currency translation loss reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss in conjunction with the liquidation of certain UK dormant entities upon receiving final regulatory approval in 2020.
(2)Included in other items, net for 2020 was $9 million of miscellaneous income related to an escrow settlement.74MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)S. INCOME TAXES (In Millions) 202020192018Income from continuing operations before income taxes:U.S. $892 $684 $670 Foreign239 230 237 $1,131 $914 $907 Income tax expense:Currently payable:U.S. Federal$170 $155 $115 State and local33 46 29 Foreign69 70 74 Deferred:U.S. Federal(9)(23)12 State and local11 (15)— Foreign(5)(3)(9)$269 $230 $221 Deferred tax assets at December 31:Receivables$9 $7 Inventories17 15 Other assets, including stock-based compensation17 15 Accrued liabilities82 48 Noncurrent operating lease liabilities35 39 Other long-term liabilities96 137 Net operating loss carryforward56 63 Tax credit carryforward9 9 321 333 Valuation allowance(35)(38)286 295 Deferred tax liabilities at December 31:Property and equipment67 73 Operating lease right-of-use assets39 42 Intangibles74 71 Investment in foreign subsidiaries10 10 Other investments3 — Other4 22 197 218 Net deferred tax asset at December 31$89 $77 The net deferred tax asset consisted of net deferred tax assets (included in other assets) of $109 million and $99 million, and net deferred tax liabilities (included in other liabilities) of $20 million and $22 million, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.We continue to maintain a valuation allowance on certain state and foreign deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020.
Should we determine that we would not be able to realize our remaining deferred tax assets, or the deferred tax assets that currently have a valuation allowance become realizable in these jurisdictions in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be recorded in the period such determination is made.75MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)S. INCOME TAXES (Continued)The current portion of the state and local income tax includes a $9 million, $8 million and $8 million tax benefit from the reversal of an accrual for uncertain tax positions resulting primarily from the expiration of applicable statutes of limitations in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The deferred portion of the state and local taxes includes a $1 million tax benefit in 2019 and 2018, resulting from changes in valuation allowances against state and local deferred tax assets.
The deferred portion of the foreign taxes includes a $5 million, $4 million and $2 million tax benefit in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, from a change in the valuation allowances against foreign deferred tax assets.Our capital allocation strategy includes reinvesting in our business, balancing share repurchases with potential acquisitions and maintaining an appropriate dividend.
In order to provide greater flexibility in the execution of our capital allocation strategy, we may repatriate earnings from certain foreign subsidiaries.
Our deferred tax balance on investment in foreign subsidiaries reflects the impact of all taxable temporary differences, including those related to substantially all undistributed foreign earnings, except those that are legally restricted, and consists primarily of foreign withholding taxes.Of the $65 million and $72 million deferred tax assets related to the net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, $35 million and $44 million, respectively, will expire between 2021 and 2036 and $30 million and $28 million, respectively, have no expiration.A reconciliation of the U.S. Federal statutory tax rate to the income tax expense on income from continuing operations before income taxes was as follows: 202020192018U.S.
Federal statutory tax rate21 %21 %21 %State and local taxes, net of U.S. Federal tax benefit3 3 3 Higher taxes on foreign earnings1 2 2 U.S. and foreign taxes on distributed and undistributed foreign earnings— 1 1 Stock-based compensation(1)(1)(2)Other, net— (1)(1)Effective tax rate24 %25 %24 %Income taxes paid were $442 million, $384 million and $231 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
76MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)S. INCOME TAXES (Concluded)A reconciliation of the beginning and ending liability for uncertain tax positions, including related interest and penalties, is as follows, in millions: UncertainTax PositionsInterest andPenaltiesTotalBalance at January 1, 2019$58 $9 $67 Current year tax positions:Additions14 — 14 Reductions(1)— (1)Prior year tax positions:Additions1 — 1 Lapse of applicable statute of limitations(9)— (9)Interest and penalties recognized in income tax expense— 1 1 Balance at December 31, 2019$63 $10 $73 Current year tax positions:Additions22 — 22 Reductions(2)— (2)Prior year tax positions:Additions2 — 2 Reductions(2)— (2)Lapse of applicable statute of limitations(9)— (9)Balance at December 31, 2020$74 $10 $84 If recognized, $58 million and $50 million of the liability for uncertain tax positions at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, net of any U.S. Federal tax benefit, would impact our effective tax rate.Of the $84 million and $73 million total liability for uncertain tax positions (including related interest and penalties) at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, $81 million and $68 million are recorded in other liabilities, respectively, and $3 million and $5 million are recorded as a net offset to other assets, respectively.We file income tax returns in the U.S. Federal jurisdiction, and various local, state and foreign jurisdictions.
We continue to participate in the Compliance Assurance Process ("CAP").
CAP is a real-time audit of the U.S. Federal income tax return that allows the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS"), working in conjunction with us, to determine tax return compliance with the U.S. Federal tax law prior to filing the return.
This program provides us with greater certainty about our tax liability for a given year within months, rather than years, of filing our annual tax return and greatly reduces the need for recording a liability for U.S. Federal uncertain tax positions.
The IRS has completed their examination of our consolidated U.S. Federal tax returns through 2019.
With few exceptions, we are no longer subject to state or foreign income tax examinations on filed returns for years before 2016.As a result of tax audit closings, settlements and the expiration of applicable statutes of limitation in various jurisdictions within the next 12 months, we anticipate that it is reasonably possible the liability for uncertain tax positions could be reduced by approximately $9 million.77MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)T. INCOME PER COMMON SHAREReconciliations of the numerators and denominators used in the computations of basic and diluted earnings per common share were as follows, in millions: 202020192018Numerator (basic and diluted):Income from continuing operations$810 $639 $636 Less: Allocation to unvested restricted stock awards6 4 6 Income from continuing operations attributable to common shareholders

804 635 630 Income from discontinued operations, net414 296 98 Less: Allocation to unvested restricted stock awards3 2 1 Income from discontinued operations, net attributable to common shareholders411 294 97 Net income attributable to common shareholders$1,215 $929 $727 Denominator:Basic common shares (based upon weighted average)264 287 305 Add: Stock option dilution— 1 2 Diluted common shares264 288 307 We follow accounting guidance regarding determining whether instruments granted in share-based payment transactions are participating securities.
This accounting guidance clarifies that share-based payment awards that entitle their holders to receive non-forfeitable dividends prior to vesting should be considered participating securities.
In 2020, we began granting restricted stock units.
The dividends associated with the unvested restricted stock units are forfeitable, and consequently, the restricted stock units are not considered a participating security and are not accounted for under the two-class method.
We have also granted restricted stock awards that contain non-forfeitable rights to dividends on unvested shares; such unvested restricted stock awards are considered participating securities.
As participating securities, the unvested shares are required to be included in the calculation of our basic income per common share, using the two-class method.
The two-class method of computing income per common share is an allocation method that calculates income per share for each class of common stock and participating security according to dividends declared and participation rights in undistributed earnings.
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we allocated dividends and undistributed earnings to the participating securities.Additionally, 374,000, 854,000 and 710,000 common shares for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to stock options and 20,000 common shares for 2018 related to performance restricted stock units were excluded from the computation of diluted income per common share due to their antidilutive effect.Common shares outstanding included on our balance sheet and for the calculation of income per common share do not include unvested stock awards (1 million and 2 million common shares at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively); shares outstanding for legal requirements included all common shares that have voting rights (including unvested stock awards).78MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)U.
OTHER COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIESLitigation.
We are involved in claims and litigation, including class actions, mass torts and regulatory proceedings, which arise in the ordinary course of our business.
The types of matters may include, among others: competition, product liability, employment, warranty, advertising, contract, personal injury, environmental, intellectual property, and insurance coverage.
We believe we have adequate defenses in these matters.
We are also subject to product safety regulations, product recalls and direct claims for product liabilities.
We believe the likelihood that the outcome of these claims, litigation and product safety matters would have a material adverse effect on us is remote.
However, there is no assurance that we will prevail in these matters, and we could, in the future, incur judgments or penalties, enter into settlements of claims or revise our expectations regarding the outcome of these matters, which could materially impact our results of operations.Warranty.
Changes in our warranty liability were as follows, in millions: 20202019Balance at January 1$84 $81 Accruals for warranties issued during the year34 34 Accruals related to pre-existing warranties(3)1 Settlements made (in cash or kind) during the year(33)(31)Other, net (including currency translation and acquisitions)1 (1)Balance at December 31$83 $84 Other Matters.
We enter into contracts, which include reasonable and customary indemnifications that are standard for the industries in which we operate.
Such indemnifications include claims made against builders by homeowners for issues relating to our products and workmanship.
In conjunction with divestitures and other transactions, we occasionally provide reasonable and customary indemnifications.
We have never had to pay a material amount related to these indemnifications, and we evaluate the probability that amounts may be incurred and record an estimated liability when it is probable and reasonably estimable.79MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)V. INTERIM FINANCIAL INFORMATION (UNAUDITED)Our quarterly results attributable to Masco Corporation were as follows:Quarters Ended (In Millions, Except Per Common Share Data) Total YearDecember 31September 30June 30March 312020
Net sales$7,188 $1,860 $1,983 $1,764 $1,581 Gross profit$2,587 $660 $752 $628 $547 Income from continuing operations$810 $192 $275 $210 $133 Net income (1)$1,224 $195 $275 $224 $530 Income per common share:Basic:Income from continuing operations

$3.05 $0.74 $1.05 $0.80 $0.49 Net income$4.60 $0.75 $1.05 $0.85 $1.93 Diluted:Income from continuing operations

$3.04 $0.73 $1.05 $0.80 $0.48 Net income$4.59 $0.74 $1.05 $0.85 $1.92 2019Net sales$6,707 $1,639 $1,716 $1,839 $1,513 Gross profit$2,371 $565 $611 $673 $522 Income from continuing operations$639 $158 $163 $211 $107 Net income (2)$935 $453 $126 $240 $116 Income per common share:Basic:Income from continuing operations

$2.21 $0.56 $0.57 $0.73 $0.36 Net income$3.24 $1.60 $0.44 $0.82 $0.39 Diluted:Income from continuing operations

$2.20 $0.56 $0.56 $0.72 $0.36 Net income$3.22 $1.59 $0.44 $0.82 $0.39 ______________________________(1)Net income includes $397 million of income from discontinued operations, net for the quarter ended March 31, 2020, which includes the gain on the sale of the Cabinetry divestiture.
(2)Net income includes $295 million and $(37) million of income (loss) from discontinued operations, net for the quarters ended December 31, 2019 and September 30, 2019, respectively, which includes the gain (loss) on the sale of the Milgard and UKWG divestitures, respectively.Income per common share amounts for the four quarters of December 31, 2020 and 2019 may not total to the income per common share amounts for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 due to the allocation of income to participating securities.80MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONCLUDED)W. SUBSEQUENT EVENTSOn January 4, 2021, we acquired a 75.1% equity interest in ESS, for approximately €45 million ($55 million), including $52 million of cash and $6 million of debt that will be paid out over two years less any pending or settled indemnity matters.
These amounts are subject to working capital and other adjustments.
This business will be included in the Plumbing Products segment.
In connection with this acquisition, we currently anticipate recognizing approximately $30 million of definite-lived intangible assets, primarily related to customer relationships.
We also anticipate recognizing approximately $25 million of goodwill, which is not tax deductible and is related primarily to the expected synergies from combining the operations into our business.
Refer to Note B for further information related to this acquisition.81Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.Not applicable.Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures.a.Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures.The Company's Principal Executive Officer and Principal Financial Officer have concluded, based on an evaluation of the Company's disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 Rules 13a-15(e) or 15d-15(e)) as required by paragraph (b) of Exchange Act Rules 13a-15 or 15d-15 that, as of December 31, 2020, the Company's disclosure controls and procedures were effective.b.Management's Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.Management's report on the Company's internal control over financial reporting (as such term is defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act) is included in this Report under
