Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.The financial and business analysis below provides information which we believe is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
This financial and business analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes.The following discussion and certain other sections of this Report contain statements that reflect our views about our future performance and constitute "forward-looking statements" under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
Forward-looking statements can be identified by words such as "believe," "anticipate," "appear," "may," "will," "should," "intend," "plan," "estimate," "expect," "assume," "seek," "forecast" and similar references to future periods.
Our views about future performance involve risks and uncertainties that are difficult to predict and, accordingly, our actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in our forward-looking statements.
We caution you against relying on any of these forward-looking statements.In addition to the various factors included in the "Executive Level Overview," "Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates" and "Outlook for the Company" sections, our future performance may be affected by the levels of residential repair and remodel activity and new home construction, our ability to maintain our strong brands and reputation and to develop new products, our ability to maintain our competitive position in our industries, our reliance on key customers, the cost and availability of raw materials, our dependence on third-party suppliers, risks associated with international operations and global strategies, our ability to achieve the anticipated benefits of our strategic initiatives, our ability to successfully execute our acquisition strategy and integrate businesses that we have and may acquire, our ability to attract, develop and retain talented personnel, our ability to achieve the anticipated benefits from our investments in new technology, risks associated with our reliance on information systems and technology, and our ability to sustain the improved results of our U.S. window business.
These and other factors are discussed in detail in Item 1A "Risk Factors" of this Report.
Any forward-looking statement made by us speaks only as of the date on which it was made.
Factors or events that could cause our actual results to differ may emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for us to predict all of them.
Unless required by law, we undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.Executive Level OverviewWe design, manufacture and distribute branded home improvement and building products.
These products are sold primarily for repair and remodeling activity and new home construction through home center retailers, mass merchandisers, hardware stores, homebuilders, distributors, online retailers, and direct to the consumer.2017 ResultsNet sales were positively affected by increased sales volume resulting from increased repair and remodel activity and new home construction, net selling price increases in Europe and the U.S., and favorable sales mix in the U.S.
Such increases were partially offset by the divestitures of Arrow and Moores, and unfavorable sales mix in Europe.
Our results of operations were positively affected by increased sales volume, cost savings initiatives and a more favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs in Europe.
Such increases were partially offset by an increase in strategic growth investments and certain other expenses, including stock-based compensation, health insurance costs, trade show costs and increased head count.Our Plumbing Products segment benefited from increased sales volume, cost savings initiatives and a favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs, and was negatively impacted by an increase in investments in strategic growth initiatives and certain other expenses (including trade show costs and increased head count).
Our Decorative Architectural Products segment was negatively affected by an unfavorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs of paints and other coating products, and an increase in strategic growth investments to support the expansion of pro paint sales and new programs in builder's hardware, and was positively impacted by increased sales volume and cost savings initiatives.
Our Cabinetry Products segment was positively affected by cost savings initiatives as well as favorable sales mix and was negatively affected by decreased sales volume, costs to support new product launches in North America, anti-dumping and countervailing duties, and an unfavorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs.
Our Windows and Other Specialty Products segment benefited from a decrease in warranty adjustments, as well as cost savings initiatives and a favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs.
17Critical Accounting Policies and EstimatesOur discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP").
The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of any contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
We regularly review our estimates and assumptions, which are based upon historical experience, as well as current economic conditions and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of certain assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions.Note A to the consolidated financial statements includes our accounting policies, estimates and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.We believe that the following critical accounting policies are affected by significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.Revenue Recognition and ReceivablesWe recognize revenue as title to products and risk of loss is transferred to customers or when services are rendered.
We record estimated reductions to revenue for customer programs and incentive offerings, including special pricing and co-operative advertising arrangements, promotions and other volume-based incentives.
We monitor our customer receivable balances and the credit worthiness of our customers on an on-going basis and maintain allowances for doubtful accounts receivable for estimated losses resulting from the inability of customers to make required payments.
During downturns in our markets, declines in the financial condition and creditworthiness of customers impact the credit risk of the receivables involved, and we have incurred additional bad debt expense related to customer defaults.
Allowances are estimated based upon specific customer balances, where a risk of default has been identified, and also include a provision for non-customer specific defaults based upon historical collection, return and write-off activity.
Goodwill and Other Intangible AssetsWe record the excess of purchase cost over the fair value of net tangible assets of acquired companies as goodwill or other identifiable intangible assets.
In the fourth quarter of each year, or as events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount, we complete the impairment testing of goodwill utilizing a discounted cash flow method.
We selected the discounted cash flow methodology because we believe that it is comparable to what would be used by market participants.
We have defined our reporting units and completed the impairment testing of goodwill at the operating segment level.Determining market values using a discounted cash flow method requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including long-term projections of cash flows, market conditions and appropriate discount rates.
Our judgments are based upon historical experience, current market trends, consultations with external valuation specialists and other information.
While we believe that the estimates and assumptions underlying the valuation methodology are reasonable, different estimates and assumptions could result in different outcomes.
In estimating future cash flows, we rely on internally generated five-year forecasts for sales and operating profits, including capital expenditures, and, currently, a two percent long-term assumed annual growth rate of cash flows for periods after the five-year forecast.
We generally develop these forecasts based upon, among other things, recent sales data for existing products, planned timing of new product launches, estimated repair and remodel activity and estimated housing starts.
Our assumptions included a relatively stable U.S.
Gross Domestic Product growing at approximately 2.3 percent per annum and a euro zone Gross Domestic Product growing at approximately 1.5 to 1.7 percent per annum over the five-year forecast.We utilize our weighted average cost of capital of approximately 8.0 percent as the basis to determine the discount rate to apply to the estimated future cash flows.
Our weighted average cost of capital decreased in 2017 as compared to 2016, primarily due to reductions in the risk free rate.
In 2017, based upon our assessment of the risks impacting each of our businesses, we applied a risk premium to increase the discount rate to a range of 10.0 percent to 13.0 percent for our reporting units.If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized to the extent that a reporting unit's recorded carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill in that reporting unit.18In the fourth quarter of 2017, we estimated that future discounted cash flows projected for all of our reporting units were greater than the carrying values.
Accordingly, we did not recognize any impairment charges for goodwill.
A 10 percent decrease in the estimated fair value of our reporting units would not have resulted in an impairment for any reporting unit.We review our other indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually, in the fourth quarter, or as events occur or circumstances change that indicate the assets may be impaired without regard to the business unit.
We consider the implications of both external (e.g., market growth, competition and local economic conditions) and internal (e.g., product sales and expected product growth) factors and their potential impact on cash flows related to the intangible asset in both the near- and long-term.
In 2017, we did not recognize any impairment charges for other indefinite-lived intangible assets.Employee Retirement PlansAs of January 1, 2010, substantially all of our domestic and foreign qualified and domestic non-qualified defined-benefit pension plans were frozen to future benefit accruals.Accounting for defined-benefit pension plans involves estimating the cost of benefits to be provided in the future, based upon vested years of service, and attributing those costs over the time period each employee works.
We develop our pension costs and obligations from actuarial valuations.
Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions regarding expected return on plan assets, mortality rates and discount rates for obligations and expenses.
We consider current market conditions, including changes in interest rates, in selecting these assumptions.
While we believe that the estimates and assumptions underlying the valuation methodology are reasonable, different estimates and assumptions could result in different reported pension costs and obligations within our consolidated financial statements.In December 2017, our discount rate for obligations decreased to a weighted average of 3.3 percent from 3.5 percent.
The discount rate for obligations is based upon the expected duration of each defined-benefit pension plan's liabilities matched to the December 31, 2017 Willis Towers Watson Rate Link curve.
The discount rates we use for our defined-benefit pension plans ranged from 1.5 percent to 3.6 percent, with the most significant portion of the liabilities having a discount rate for obligations of 3.4 percent or higher.
The assumed asset return was primarily 7.25 percent, reflecting the expected long-term return on plan assets based upon an analysis of expected and historical rates of return of various asset classes utilizing the current and long-term asset allocation of the plan assets.Our net underfunded amount for our qualified defined-benefit pension plans, which is the difference between the projected benefit obligation and plan assets, decreased to $266 million at December 31, 2017 from $338 million at December 31, 2016.
Our projected benefit obligation for our unfunded, non-qualified, defined-benefit pension plans was $170 million at both December 31, 2017 and 2016.
These unfunded plans are not subject to the funding requirements of the Pension Protection Act of 2006.
In accordance with the Pension Protection Act, the Adjusted Funding Target Attainment Percentage for the various defined-benefit pension plans ranges from 80 percent to 108 percent.The decrease in our qualified defined-benefit pension plan projected benefit obligation was impacted primarily by the divestiture of Moores, due to the transfer of $144 million of plan obligations to the purchaser in connection with the sale of the business.
A change to the MP 2017 Mortality Improvement Scale also decreased our long-term pension liabilities.
The decrease was partially offset by a lower discount rate compared to the prior year.
During 2017, we contributed $52 million to our qualified defined-benefit pension plans.
Additionally, our qualified defined-benefit pension plan assets had a net gain of 13.9 percent in 2017.
Refer to Note L to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
We expect pension expense for our qualified defined-benefit pension plans to be $12 million in 2018 compared with $20 million in 2017.
If we assumed that the future return on plan assets was one-half percent lower than the assumed asset return and the discount rate decreased by 50 basis points, the 2018 pension expense would increase by $4 million.
We expect pension expense for our non-qualified defined-benefit pension plans to be $8 million in 2018, compared to $9 million in 2017.We anticipate that we will be required to contribute approximately $25 million in 2018 to our qualified and non-qualified defined-benefit plans; however, we currently anticipate contributing approximately $61 million in 2018.
Refer to Note L to the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding the funding of our plans.19Income TaxesDeferred taxes are recognized based on the future tax consequences of differences between the financial statement carrying value of assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis.
The future realization of deferred tax assets depends on the existence of sufficient taxable income in future periods.
Possible sources of taxable income include taxable income in carryback periods, the future reversal of existing taxable temporary differences recorded as a deferred tax liability, tax-planning strategies that generate future income or gains in excess of anticipated losses in the carryforward period and projected future taxable income.If, based upon all available evidence, both positive and negative, it is more likely than not (more than 50 percent likely) such deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is recorded.
Significant weight is given to positive and negative evidence that is objectively verifiable.
A company's three-year cumulative loss position is significant negative evidence in considering whether deferred tax assets are realizable, and the accounting guidance restricts the amount of reliance we can place on projected taxable income to support the recovery of the deferred tax assets.We maintain a valuation allowance on certain state and foreign deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2017.
Should we determine that we would not be able to realize our remaining deferred tax assets in these jurisdictions in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be recorded in the period such determination is made.
The need to maintain a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets may cause greater volatility in our effective tax rate.The current accounting guidance allows the recognition of only those income tax positions that have a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities.
We believe that there is an increased potential for volatility in our effective tax rate because this threshold allows changes in the income tax environment and the inherent complexities of income tax law in a substantial number of jurisdictions to affect the computation of our liability for uncertain tax positions to a greater extent.While we believe we have adequately provided for our uncertain tax positions, amounts asserted by taxing authorities could vary from our liability for uncertain tax positions.
Accordingly, additional provisions for tax-related matters, including interest and penalties, could be recorded in income tax expense in the period revised estimates are made or the underlying matters are settled or otherwise resolved.The comprehensive U.S. tax reform, which is generally effective in 2018, is expected to have a significant impact on our effective tax rate and taxes paid primarily due to the reduction in the U.S. Federal corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent and the additional U.S. and foreign taxes on our foreign earnings.
The impact from U.S. tax reform may differ from our current estimates due to the issuance of future regulatory guidance that differs from our current interpretation.
As a result of this new legislation, we currently anticipate our effective tax rate in 2018 to be approximately 26 percent.
We intend to allocate the benefit from lower cash tax payments to our existing capital allocation strategy.
WarrantyWe offer full and limited warranties on certain products, with warranty periods ranging up to the lifetime of the product to the original consumer purchaser.
At the time of sale, we accrue a warranty liability for the estimated future cost to provide products, parts or services to repair or replace products to satisfy our warranty obligations.
Our estimate of future costs to service our warranty obligations is based upon the information available and includes a number of factors, such as the warranty coverage, the warranty period, historical experience specific to the nature, frequency and average cost to service the claim, along with industry and demographic trends.Certain factors and related assumptions in determining our warranty liability involve judgments and estimates and are sensitive to changes in the factors described above.
We believe that the warranty accrual is appropriate; however, actual claims incurred could differ from our original estimates, which would require us to adjust our previously established accruals.
Refer to Note S to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.A significant portion of our business is at the consumer retail level through home center retailers and other major retailers.
A consumer may return a product to a retail outlet that is a warranty return.
However, certain retail outlets do not distinguish between warranty and other types of returns when they claim a return deduction from us.
Our revenue recognition policy takes into account this type of return when recognizing revenue, and an estimate of these amounts is recorded as a deduction to net sales at the time of sale.20LitigationWe are involved in claims and litigation, including class actions and regulatory proceedings, which arise in the ordinary course of our business.
Liabilities and costs associated with these matters require estimates and judgments based upon our professional knowledge and experience and that of our legal counsel.
When estimates of our exposure in these matters meet the criteria for recognition under accounting guidance, amounts are recorded as charges to earnings.
The ultimate resolution of these exposures may differ due to subsequent developments.Corporate Development StrategyWe expect to maintain a balanced growth strategy pursuing organic growth by maximizing the full potential of our existing core businesses and complementing our existing business with strategic acquisitions, particularly in the Plumbing Products and Decorative Architectural Products segments.
In addition, we actively manage our portfolio of companies by divesting of those businesses that do not align with our long-term growth strategy.
We will continue to review all of our businesses to determine which businesses, if any, may not be core to our long-term growth strategy.Liquidity and Capital Resources Historically, we have largely funded our growth through cash provided by our operations, the issuance of notes in the financial markets, long-term bank debt and the issuance of our common stock, including issuances for certain mergers and acquisitions.
Maintaining high levels of liquidity and focusing on cash generation are among our financial strategies.
Our capital allocation strategy includes reinvesting in our business, balancing share repurchases with potential acquisitions and maintaining an appropriate dividend.Our total debt as a percent of total capitalization was 95 percent and 104 percent at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
Refer to Note J to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.On June 21, 2017, we issued $300 million of 3.5% Notes due November 15, 2027 and $300 million of 4.5% Notes due May 15, 2047.
We received proceeds of $599 million, net of discount, for the issuance of these Notes.
The Notes are senior indebtedness and are redeemable at our option at the applicable redemption price.
On June 27, 2017, proceeds from the debt issuances, together with cash on hand, were used to repay and early retire $299 million of our 7.125% Notes due March 15, 2020, $74 million of our 5.95% Notes due March 15, 2022, $62 million of our 7.75% Notes due August 1, 2029, and $100 million of our 6.5% Notes due August 15, 2032.
In connection with these early retirements, we incurred a loss on debt extinguishment of $107 million, which was recorded as interest expense.On March 17, 2016, we issued $400 million of 3.5% Notes due April 1, 2021 and $500 million of 4.375% Notes due April 1, 2026.
We received proceeds of $896 million, net of discount, for the issuance of these Notes.
The Notes are senior indebtedness and are redeemable at our option at the applicable redemption price.
On April 15, 2016, proceeds from the debt issuances, together with cash on hand, were used to repay and early retire all of our $1 billion, 6.125% Notes which were due on October 3, 2016 and all of our $300 million, 5.85% Notes which were due on March 15, 2017.
In connection with these early retirements, we incurred a loss on debt extinguishment of $40 million, which was recorded as interest expense.
On June 15, 2015, we repaid and retired all of our $500 million, 4.8% Notes on the scheduled retirement date.On March 24, 2015, we issued $500 million of 4.45% Notes due April 1, 2025.
On March 28, 2013, we entered into a credit agreement (the "Credit Agreement") with a bank group, with an aggregate commitment of $1.25 billion and a maturity date of March 28, 2018.
On May 29, 2015 and August 28, 2015, we amended the Credit Agreement with the bank group (the "Amended Credit Agreement").
The Amended Credit Agreement reduces the aggregate commitment to $750 million and extends the maturity date to May 29, 2020.
Under the Amended Credit Agreement, at our request and subject to certain conditions, we can increase the aggregate commitment up to an additional $375 million with the current bank group or new lenders.
Refer to Note J to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.The Amended Credit Agreement contains financial covenants requiring us to maintain (A) a maximum net leverage ratio, as adjusted for certain items, of 4.0 to 1.0, and (B) a minimum interest coverage ratio, as adjusted for certain items, equal to or greater than 2.5 to 1.0.
We were in compliance with all covenants and had no borrowings under our 21Amended Credit Agreement at December 31, 2017.
We expect to remain in compliance with these covenants through at least the next year.We had cash, cash investments and short-term bank deposits of approximately $1.3 billion at December 31, 2017.
Our cash and cash investments consist of overnight interest bearing money market demand accounts, time deposit accounts, and money market mutual funds containing government securities and treasury obligations.
While we attempt to diversify these investments in a prudent manner to minimize risk, it is possible that future changes in the financial markets could affect the security or availability of these investments.
Our short-term bank deposits consist of time deposits with maturities of 12 months or less.Of the $1.3 billion and $1.2 billion of cash, cash investments and short-term bank deposits we held at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively, $759 million and $618 million, respectively, is held in our foreign subsidiaries.
If these funds were needed for our operations in the U.S., their repatriation into the U.S. would not result in significant additional U.S. income tax or foreign withholding tax, as we have recorded such taxes on substantially all undistributed foreign earnings, except for those that are legally restricted.We utilize derivative and hedging instruments to manage our exposure to currency fluctuations, primarily related to the European euro, British pound and the U.S. dollar; occasionally, we have also used derivative and hedging instruments to manage our exposure to commodity cost fluctuations, primarily zinc and copper, and interest rate fluctuations, primarily related to debt issuances.
We review our hedging program, derivative positions and overall risk management on a regular basis.
We currently do not have any derivative instruments for which we have designated hedge accounting.In the third quarter of 2017, we increased our quarterly dividend to $.105 per common share from $.10 per common share.
During 2017, we repurchased 9.2 million shares of our common stock for cash aggregating $331 million.In December 2017, we signed a definitive agreement to acquire The L.D.
Kichler Co. ("Kichler"), a leader in decorative residential and light commercial lighting products, ceiling fans and LED lighting systems.
This business will expand our product offerings to repair and remodel customers.
We expect this transaction to close in the first quarter of 2018, at which time we expect to pay approximately $550 million for the business, using cash on hand.
We intend to report this business in our Decorative Architectural Products segment.
Our current ratio was 2.0 to 1 at both December 31, 2017 and 2016.22Cash FlowsSignificant sources and (uses) of cash in the past three years are summarized as follows, in millions: 2017 2016 2015Net cash from operating activities$751 $789 $810Retirement of notes(535) (1,300) (500)Purchase of Company common stock(331) (459) (456)Cash dividends paid(129) (128) (126)Dividends paid to noncontrolling interest(35) (31) (36)Capital expenditures(173) (180) (158)Debt extinguishment costs(104) (40) —Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired(89) — (41)Cash distributed to TopBuild Corp. — — (63)Issuance of TopBuild Corp. debt— — 200Issuance of notes, net of issuance costs593 889 497Employee withholding taxes paid on stock-based compensation(33) (40) (36)Proceeds from disposition of:
 Businesses, net of cash disposed128 — —Property and equipment24 — 18Financial investments7 32 10Decrease in debt, net(3) (1) —Proceeds of short-term bank deposits, net112 40 26Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash investments55 (34) (15)Other, net(34) (15) (45)Cash increase (decrease)$204 $(478) $85Our working capital days were as follows: At December 31, 2017 2016Receivable days51 49Inventory days59 54Accounts Payable days72 70Working capital (receivables plus inventories, less accounts payable) as a percentage of net sales13.0% 11.3%Net cash provided by operations of $751 million consisted primarily of net income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization expense of $127 million, stock-based compensation expense and amortization expense related to in-store displays, as well as cash items which are classified as financing activities, including debt extinguishment costs of $104 million and employee withholding taxes paid on stock-based compensation.
These amounts were partially offset by changes in working capital, resulting primarily from an increase in inventory levels to support our growth and new programs and changes in contract terms with certain customers.
Net cash provided by operations was also impacted by contributions to our defined-benefit pension plans.Net cash used for financing activities was $577 million, primarily due to the early retirement of $299 million of our 7.125% Notes due March 15, 2020, $74 million of our 5.95% Notes due March 15, 2022, $62 million of our 7.75% Notes due August 1, 2029, and $100 million of our 6.5% Notes due August 15, 2032, and related extinguishment costs of $104 million.
Net cash used for financing activities was also impacted by $331 million for the repurchase and retirement of Company common stock (as part of our strategic initiative to drive shareholder value), $129 million for cash dividends paid, $35 million for dividends paid to noncontrolling interests and $33 million for employee withholding taxes paid on stock-based compensation.
These amounts were partially offset by the issuance of $300 million of 3.5% Notes due November 15, 2027 and $300 million of 4.5% Notes due May 15, 2047.23In May 2017, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase, for retirement, of up to $1.5 billion of shares of our common stock in open-market transactions or otherwise, replacing the previous Board of Directors authorization established in 2014.
During 2017, we repurchased and retired 9.2 million shares of our common stock, (including 0.9 million shares repurchased to offset the dilutive impact of long-term stock awards granted in 2017).
At December 31, 2017, we had approximately $1.3 billion remaining under the 2017 authorization.
Consistent with past practice and as part of our strategic initiative, we anticipate using $200 to $300 million of cash for share repurchases (including shares which will be purchased to offset any dilution from long-term stock awards granted as part of our compensation programs) or acquisitions in 2018, in addition to our expected acquisition of Kichler in the first quarter of 2018.Net cash used for investing activities was $25 million, primarily driven by $173 million for capital expenditures and $89 million for the acquisition of Mercury, partially offset by $128 million from the sale of Arrow and $112 million net proceeds from the disposition of short-term bank deposits.
We continue to invest in our manufacturing and distribution operations to increase our productivity, improve customer service and support new product innovation.
Capital expenditures for 2017 were $173 million, compared with $180 million for 2016 and $158 million for 2015.
For 2018, capital expenditures, excluding any acquisitions, are expected to be approximately $220 million.
Depreciation and amortization expense for 2017 totaled $127 million, compared with $134 million for 2016 and $133 million for 2015.
For 2018, depreciation and amortization expense, excluding any potential 2018 acquisitions, is expected to be approximately $135 million.
Amortization expense totaled $11 million, $10 million and $11 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.Costs of environmental responsibilities and compliance with existing environmental laws and regulations have not had, nor do we expect them to have, a material effect on our capital expenditures, financial position or results of operations.We believe that our present cash balance and cash flows from operations are sufficient to fund our near-term working capital and other investment needs.
We believe that our longer-term working capital and other general corporate requirements will be satisfied through cash flows from operations and, to the extent necessary, from bank borrowings and future financial market activities.Consolidated Results of OperationsWe report our financial results in accordance with GAAP in the United States.
However, we believe that certain non-GAAP performance measures and ratios, used in managing the business, may provide users of this financial information with additional meaningful comparisons between current results and results in prior periods.
Non-GAAP performance measures and ratios should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, our reported results under GAAP.Sales and OperationsNet sales for 2017 were $7.6 billion, which increased four percent compared with 2016.
Excluding acquisitions, divestitures and the effect of currency translation, net sales increased four percent compared to 2016.
The following table reconciles reported net sales to net sales excluding acquisitions, divestitures and the effect of currency translation, in millions: Year EndedDecember 31 2017 2016Net sales, as reported$7,644 $7,357Acquisitions(3) —Divestitures— (44)Net sales, excluding acquisitions and divestitures7,641 7,313Currency translation1 —Net sales, excluding acquisitions, divestitures and the effect of currency translation$7,642 $7,313Net sales for 2017 were positively affected by increased sales volume of plumbing products, paints and other coating products and builders' hardware, which, in aggregate, increased sales by approximately four percent compared to 2016.
Net sales for 2017 were also positively affected by favorable sales mix of cabinets, North American plumbing products, North American windows, and net selling price increases of windows and international plumbing products, which, in aggregate, increased sales approximately two percent compared to 2016.
Net sales for 2017 were negatively 24affected by lower sales volume of cabinets, the divestiture of our Arrow and Moores businesses, and an unfavorable sales mix of international plumbing products, which, in aggregate, decreased sales by approximately two percent compared to 2016.
Net sales for 2016 were positively affected by increased sales volume of plumbing products, paints and other coating products and builders' hardware, which, in aggregate, increased sales by approximately five percent compared to 2015.
Net sales for 2016 were also positively affected by favorable sales mix of cabinets and windows, and net selling price increases of North American windows and North American and international plumbing products, which, in aggregate, increased sales approximately one percent.
Net sales for 2016 were negatively affected by lower sales volume of cabinets and lower net selling prices of paints and other coating products, which, in aggregate, decreased sales by approximately two percent.Net sales for 2015 were positively affected by increased sales volume of plumbing products, paints and other coating products, windows and builders' hardware.
Net sales for 2015 were also positively affected by net selling price increases of plumbing products, cabinets and windows, as well as sales mix of North American cabinets and windows.
Net sales for 2015 were negatively affected by lower sales volume of cabinets and lower net selling prices of paints and other coating products.Our gross profit margins were 34.2 percent, 33.4 percent and 31.5 percent in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
The 2017 and 2016 gross profit margins were positively impacted by increased sales volume, a more favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs, and cost savings initiatives.
2016 gross profit margins were negatively impacted by an increase in warranty costs resulting from a change in our estimate of expected future warranty claim costs.Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percent of sales were 18.9 percent in 2017 compared with 19.1 percent in 2016 and 18.7 percent in 2015.
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percent of sales in 2017 reflect increased sales and the effect of cost containment measures, partially offset by an increase in strategic growth investments, stock-based compensation, health insurance costs and trade show costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percent of sales in 2016 reflect strategic growth investments, ERP system implementation costs and higher insurance costs.
The following table reconciles reported operating profit to operating profit, as adjusted to exclude certain items, dollars in millions: 2017 2016 2015Operating profit, as reported$1,169 $1,053 $914Rationalization charges4 22 18Gain from sale of property and equipment— — (5)Operating profit, as adjusted$1,173 $1,075 $927Operating profit margins, as reported15.3% 14.3% 12.8%Operating profit margins, as adjusted15.3% 14.6% 13.0%Operating profit margins in 2017 and 2016 were positively affected by increased sales volume, cost savings initiatives, and a more favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs.
Operating profit margin in 2017 was negatively impacted by an increase in strategic growth investments and certain other expenses, including stock-based compensation, health insurance costs, trade show costs and increased head count.
Operating profit margin in 2016 was negatively impacted by an increase in warranty costs by a business in our Windows and Other Specialty Products segment and an increase in strategic growth investments, as well as ERP system implementation costs and higher insurance costs.25Other Income (Expense), NetOther, net, for 2017 included net losses of $13 million related to the divestitures of Arrow and Moores and $2 million related to the impairment of a private equity fund, partially offset by $3 million related to distributions from private equity funds and $1 million of earnings related to equity investments.Other, net, for 2016 included net gains of $5 million from distributions from private equity funds, $3 million from the redemption of auction rate securities and $2 million of earnings from equity investments.
Other, net for 2016 also included realized foreign currency losses of $3 million and other miscellaneous items.
Other, net, for 2015 included net gains of $6 million from distributions from private equity funds and $2 million of earnings from equity investments.
Other, net, for 2015 also included realized foreign currency losses of $14 million and other miscellaneous items.Interest expense was $278 million, $229 million and $225 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Interest expense increased in 2017 and 2016 due primarily to the $107 million and $40 million losses on debt extinguishment which were recorded as additional interest expense in connection with the early retirement of debt in 2017 and 2016, respectively.
These increases were partially offset by the discharge of indebtedness (2016 only) as well as refinancing certain debt at more favorable interest rates.Income and Earnings Per Common Share from Continuing Operations (Attributable to Masco Corporation)Income and diluted income per common share from continuing operations for 2017 were $533 million and $1.66 per common share, respectively.
Income and diluted income per common share from continuing operations for 2016 were $491 million and $1.47 per common share, respectively.
Income and diluted income per common share from continuing operations for 2015 were $357 million and $1.03 per common share, respectively.Our effective tax rate was 34 percent, 36 percent and 43 percent in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Effective January 1, 2017 we adopted ASU 2016-09, which requires the tax effects related to employee stock-based payments to be recorded to income tax expense, thus increasing the volatility in our effective tax rate.
Our normalized tax rate was 34 percent in 2017, compared to 36 percent in 2016 and 2015.Our 2017 effective tax rate was impacted by divestitures of businesses with no tax impact.
This impact was offset by a $17 million net tax benefit from the impact of changes in the U.S. Federal tax law and a $20 million tax benefit from stock-based compensation payments recognized in 2017.Our 2016 effective tax rate includes a $14 million charge to tax expense from the elimination of a disproportionate tax effect resulting from our auction rate securities being called by our counterparty during 2016.
This charge was offset by a $13 million tax benefit from the recognition of a deferred tax asset on certain German net operating losses primarily resulting from a return to sustainable profitability.
Compared to our normalized tax rate of 36 percent, the variance in 2015 is due primarily to a $21 million valuation allowance against certain deferred tax assets of TopBuild recorded as a non-cash charge to income tax expense.
The TopBuild deferred tax assets have been impaired by our decision to spin off TopBuild into a separate company that on a stand-alone basis as of June 30, 2015, the spin off date, was unlikely to be able to realize the value of such deferred tax assets as a result of its history of losses.The 2015 effective tax rate also includes a $19 million charge to income tax expense to recognize the required taxes on substantially all undistributed foreign earnings, except for those that are legally restricted.
This charge was the result of our determination that we may need to repatriate earnings from certain foreign subsidiaries that were previously considered permanently reinvested in order to provide greater flexibility in the execution of our capital management strategy.Refer to Note Q to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Outlook for the CompanyWe continue to successfully execute our long-term growth strategies by leveraging our strong brand portfolio, industry-leading positions and Masco Operating System, our methodology to drive growth and productivity.
We believe the fundamentals of our industry remain strong and support long-term growth of our products.
We believe that our strong financial position, together with our current strategy of investing in our industry-leading branded building products, our continued focus on innovation and our commitment to operational excellence, the active management of our portfolio and disciplined capital allocation will allow us to drive long-term growth and create value for our shareholders.26Business Segment and Geographic Area ResultsThe following table sets forth our net sales and operating profit (loss) information by business segment and geographic area, dollars in millions.
PercentChange 2017 2016 2015 2017vs.2016 2016vs.2015Net Sales:
 Plumbing Products$3,735 $3,526 $3,341 6 % 6 %Decorative Architectural Products2,205 2,092 2,020 5 % 4 %Cabinetry Products934 970 1,025 (4)% (5)%Windows and Other Specialty Products770 769 756 — % 2 %Total$7,644 $7,357 $7,142 4 % 3 %North America$6,069 $5,834 $5,645 4 % 3 %International, principally Europe1,575 1,523 1,497 3 % 2 %Total$7,644 $7,357 $7,142 4 % 3 % 2017 2016 2015Operating Profit (Loss): (A)
 Plumbing Products$698 $642 $512Decorative Architectural Products434 430 403Cabinetry Products90 93 51Windows and Other Specialty Products52 (3) 57Total$1,274 $1,162 $1,023
North America$1,072 $961 $841International, principally Europe202 201 182Total1,274 1,162 1,023General corporate expense, net(105) (109) (109)Total operating profit$1,169 $1,053 $914 2017 2016 2015Operating Profit (Loss) Margin: (A)
 Plumbing Products18.7% 18.2 % 15.3%Decorative Architectural Products19.7% 20.6 % 20.0%Cabinetry Products9.6% 9.6 % 5.0%Windows and Other Specialty Products6.8% (0.4)% 7.5%
North America17.7% 16.5 % 14.9%International, principally Europe12.8% 13.2 % 12.2%Total16.7% 15.8 % 14.3%
Total operating profit margin, as reported15.3% 14.3 % 12.8%










 (A)Before general corporate expense, net; refer to Note O to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.27Business Segment Results DiscussionChanges in operating profit margins in the following Business Segment and Geographic Area Results discussion exclude general corporate expense, net.Plumbing ProductsSalesNet sales of Plumbing Products increased six percent in 2017 compared to 2016, primarily due to increased sales volume of both North American and International operations, net selling price increases of International operations and a favorable sales mix of North American operations, which, in aggregate, increased sales by seven percent compared to 2016.
These increases were partially offset by an unfavorable sales mix of International operations, which decreased sales by one percent compared to 2016.
Net sales in this segment increased six percent in 2016 compared to 2015, primarily due to increased sales volume of both North American and international operations, partially offset by foreign currency translation, which reduced sales by one percent compared to 2015.
Net sales in this segment increased in 2015 primarily due to increased sales volume of both North American and international operations, and net selling price increases primarily related to international operations.
This segment's sales were also positively impacted by an acquisition that occurred in 2015.
Foreign currency translation reduced sales primarily due to the stronger U.S. dollar.Operating ResultsOperating margins in the Plumbing Products segment in 2017 were positively impacted by increased sales volume, cost savings initiatives, and a favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs, partially offset by an increase in strategic growth initiatives and certain other expenses (including trade show costs and higher head count).Operating margins in this segment in 2016 were positively impacted by increased sales volume, a favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs (including the positive impact of metal hedge contracts), and the benefits associated with business rationalization and other cost savings initiatives.
Such increases were partially offset by an increase in strategic growth investments, higher insurance costs, and unfavorable sales mix.
Operating margins in this segment in 2015 were negatively impacted by unfavorable sales mix, as well as an increase in certain variable expenses, such as trade show and marketing expenses and legal-related expenses.
Such decreases were partially offset by increased sales volume and a favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs (including the negative impact of the metal hedge contracts).
Decorative Architectural ProductsSalesNet sales of Decorative Architectural Products increased five percent in 2017 compared to 2016 primarily due to increased sales volume of paints and other coating products and builders' hardware, resulting from growth in our BEHR PRO® business and the expansion of our shower door and cabinet hardware programs, as well as net selling price increases of paints and other coating products.
Net sales in this segment increased four percent in 2016 compared to 2015.
Net sales increased primarily due to increased sales volume of paints and other coating products related to our BEHR PRO business and core-DIY products, as well as builder's hardware.
Such increases were partially offset by lower net selling prices of paints and other coating products.Net sales in this segment increased in 2015, primarily due to increased sales volume of paints and other coating products related to the expansion of the BEHR PRO business and increased sales volume of builders' hardware.
Such increases were partially offset by lower net selling prices of paints and other coating products and an unfavorable currency impact of Canadian paints and other coating products sales.Operating ResultsOperating margins in the Decorative Architectural Products segment in 2017 were negatively affected by an unfavorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs of paints and other coating products, and an 28increase in strategic growth investments to support the expansion of pro paint sales and new programs in builders' hardware.
Such cost increases were partially offset by increased sales volume and cost savings initiatives.
Operating margins in this segment in 2016 reflect increased sales volume of paints and other coating products and builders' hardware, partially offset by an unfavorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs of paints and other coating products.Operating margins in this segment in 2015 reflect operational efficiencies due to benefits associated with cost savings initiatives, a more favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs and increased sales volume of paints and other coating products and builders' hardware.
Such increases were partially offset by an increase in advertising and display expenses.
Operating margins were also negatively impacted by unfavorable currency effects from our Canadian operating results due to the stronger U.S. dollar in 2015.Cabinetry ProductsSalesNet sales of Cabinetry Products decreased four percent in 2017 compared to 2016 primarily due to lower sales volume of North American cabinets, mainly due to decreased sales to our builder customers in the U.S., which decreased sales by five percent compared to 2016.
Additionally, our international cabinet business experienced lower sales volume due to the continued exit of certain accounts in the U.K., which, combined with our divestiture of the same business in the fourth quarter, decreased sales by two percent compared to 2016.
Such decreases were partially offset by a positive sales mix of North American cabinets, which increased sales by three percent compared to 2016.Net sales in this segment decreased five percent in 2016 compared to 2015.
Net sales decreased primarily due to lower sales volume of cabinets resulting from our deliberate exit of certain lower margin business in the direct-to-builder channel in the U.S. and other accounts in the U.K., which, in aggregate, decreased sales by 10 percent compared to 2015, and a stronger U.S. dollar, which decreased sales by one percent compared to 2015.
Such decreases were partially offset by a favorable sales mix of North American and international cabinets and net selling price increases of North American cabinets, which, in aggregate, increased sales by six percent compared to 2015.Net sales in this segment increased in 2015 primarily due to a favorable sales mix and net selling price increases of North American and international cabinets.
Net sales decreased due to decreased sales volumes in both North America and international cabinets.Operating ResultsOperating margins in the Cabinetry Products segment in 2017 were flat compared to 2016.
Cost savings initiatives as well as positive sales mix of North American cabinets were offset by decreased sales volume, costs to support new product launches in North America, anti-dumping and countervailing duties, and an unfavorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs of North American cabinets.
Operating margins in this segment in 2016 were positively affected by operational efficiencies due to the benefits associated with business rationalization activities and other cost savings initiatives, a favorable sales mix, and a more favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs, primarily at our North American cabinets business.
This increase was partially offset by decreased sales volume in North American and international cabinets.Operating margins in this segment in 2015 were positively affected by operational efficiencies due to the benefits associated with business rationalization activities and other cost savings initiatives and decreased business rationalization expenses.
Operating margins were also positively affected by a more favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs and a favorable sales mix.Windows and Other Specialty ProductsSalesNet sales of Windows and Other Specialty Products were flat in 2017 compared to 2016.
Excluding the divestiture of Arrow, sales increased five percent compared to 2016.
Net selling price increases of North American and international windows, increased sales volume of North American windows, and a favorable sales mix of North American windows, in aggregate, increased sales by seven percent compared to 2016.
These increases were partially offset by decreased sales volume of international windows, which decreased sales by one percent compared to 2016.
Foreign currency translation also decreased sales by one percent compared to 2016, due to a weaker U.S. dollar.29Net sales in this segment increased two percent in 2016 compared to 2015.
Net sales increased primarily due to increased net selling prices of North American windows and a favorable sales mix of North American and international windows, which, on a combined basis, increased sales by four percent compared to 2015.
An acquisition positively impacted sales by one percent compared to 2015.
These increases were partially offset by a stronger U.S. dollar which decreased sales by three percent compared to 2015.Net sales in this segment increased in 2015 primarily due to increased sales volume and a favorable sales mix of North American windows in the Western U.S.
This segment's sales were also positively impacted by an acquisition that occurred in 2015, net selling price increases, increased sales volume and a favorable sales mix of our U.K. windows business.
A stronger U.S. dollar decreased sales.Operating ResultsOperating margins in the Windows and Other Specialty Products segment in 2017 were positively affected by a decrease in warranty adjustments, cost savings initiatives and a favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs of North American windows.Operating margins in this segment decreased in 2016 due to a $31 million increase in our estimate of expected future warranty claims relating to previously sold windows and doors.
The change in estimate resulted from the adoption of an improved warranty valuation model and the availability of additional information used to support the estimate of costs to service claims and recent warranty claim trends, including a shift to increased costs to repair.
Operating margins also decreased due to increases in certain other expenses, such as higher labor costs and ERP system implementation costs at our North American windows business.
Such costs were partially offset by a more favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs of U.S. windows.Operating margins in this segment in 2015 reflect higher sales volume and favorable sales mix of windows in the Western U.S., and a more favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs of windows in the U.S. and U.K.
Such increases were partially offset by an increase in certain expenses, such as advertising and ERP system implementation costs in 2015.Business Rationalizations and Other InitiativesOver the last several years, we have taken several actions focused on the strategic rationalization of our businesses including business consolidations, plant closures, head count reductions and other cost savings initiatives.
For the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, we incurred net pre-tax costs and charges related to these initiatives of $4 million, $22 million, and $18 million, respectively.We continue to realize the benefits of our business rationalizations and continuous improvement initiatives across our enterprise and expect to identify additional opportunities to improve our business operations, although we do not anticipate that the costs and charges related to our ongoing commitment to continuous improvement will be as significant as they have been in prior years.During 2017, our Plumbing Products segment incurred costs of $2 million primarily related to plant closure costs and severance in North America.
Our Cabinetry Products segment incurred costs and charges of $2 million primarily related to plant closure costs in North America.During 2016, our Plumbing Products segment incurred costs of $13 million primarily related to plant closure costs in Canada and at our international operations, as well as severance costs across multiple businesses.
Our Cabinetry Products segment incurred costs and charges of $8 million primarily related to cost savings initiatives in North America.
Lastly, our Windows and Other Specialty Products segment incurred costs of $1 million related to severance at our U.S. windows business.During 2015, our Plumbing Products segment incurred costs of $9 million primarily related to severance and other cost savings initiatives across multiple businesses.
Our Cabinetry Products segment incurred costs and charges of $5 million primarily related to cost savings initiatives in North America.
Our corporate office incurred $4 million in costs primarily related to severance actions.30Geographic Area Results DiscussionNorth AmericaSalesNorth American net sales in 2017 increased four percent compared to 2016.
Net sales were positively impacted by increased sales volume of plumbing products, paints and other coating products, builders' hardware and windows, which more than offset decreased sales volume of cabinets.
In aggregate, sales volume increased sales by three percent compared to 2016.
Favorable sales mix of cabinets, plumbing products and windows, and net selling price increases of windows and paints and other coating products, in aggregate, increased sales by two percent compared to 2016.
The divestiture of Arrow decreased sales by one percent compared to 2016.North American net sales in 2016 were positively impacted by increased sales volume of paints and other coating products, plumbing products and builders' hardware, which more than offset decreased sales volume of cabinets.
In aggregate, sales volume increased sales by three percent compared to 2015.
A favorable sales mix of cabinets and windows, in aggregate, increased sales by one percent compared to 2015.
Increased net selling prices of windows, plumbing products and cabinets, in aggregate, also increased sales by one percent compared to 2015.
Such increases were partially offset by lower net selling prices of paints and other coating products.North American net sales in 2015 were positively impacted by increased sales volume of plumbing products, paints and other coating products, windows and builders' hardware which more than offset negative sales volume of cabinets.
Net sales were also positively impacted by a favorable sales mix of cabinets and windows and increased net selling prices of cabinets, plumbing products and windows.
An acquisition also positively impacted sales.
Such increases were partially offset by foreign currency translation, primarily due to the stronger U.S. dollar and lower net selling prices of paints and other coating products.Operating ResultsOperating margins from North American operations in 2017 were positively impacted by cost savings initiatives, increased sales volume, and favorable sales mix, partially offset by increases in strategic growth initiatives, an unfavorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs, and certain other expenses, including increased head count.Operating margins from North American operations in 2016 were positively affected by the benefits associated with business rationalization and other cost savings initiatives.
North American operations were also positively affected by increased sales volume, a more favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs, as well as a favorable sales mix.
Such increases were partially offset by an increase in warranty costs and certain other expenses, such as higher labor costs, ERP system implementation costs, strategic growth investments and insurance costs.Operating margins from North American operations in 2015 were positively affected by increased sales volume, as well as a more favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs.
North American operations were also positively affected by the benefits associated with past business rationalization and other cost savings initiatives and decreased business rationalization expenses.International, Principally EuropeSalesNet sales from International operations in 2017 increased three percent compared to 2016.
In local currencies (including sales in foreign currencies outside their respective functional currencies), net sales increased four percent compared to 2016.
Net sales were positively impacted by increased sales volume of plumbing products and net selling price increases of plumbing products and windows, which, in aggregate, increased sales by seven percent compared to 2016.
Such increases were partially offset by an unfavorable sales mix of plumbing products and lower sales volume of cabinets and windows, which, in aggregate, decreased sales by three percent compared to 2016.
The divestiture of Moores also decreased sales by one percent compared to 2016.Net sales from International operations increased by two percent in 2016 compared to 2015.
In local currencies, net sales increased six percent compared to 2015, due primarily to increased sales volume of plumbing products, which increased sales by six percent compared to 2015.
Net sales were also positively impacted by a favorable sales mix of cabinets and windows, and increased net selling prices for plumbing products, which, in aggregate, increased sales by one percent compared to 2015.
These increases were partially offset by lower sales volume for cabinets, which decreased sales by one percent compared to 2015.31Net sales from International operations decreased in 2015 primarily due to a stronger U.S. dollar.
In local currencies, net sales increased primarily due to increased net selling prices and sales volume for plumbing products.
An acquisition also positively impacted net sales, partially offset by lower sales volumes for cabinets.Operating ResultsOperating margins from International operations in 2017 were negatively impacted by unfavorable sales mix, increases in certain other expenses (including trade show costs and increased head count) and investments in strategic growth initiatives, partially offset by a favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs and increased sales volume.Operating margins from International operations in 2016 were positively affected by increased sales volume and a more favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs of plumbing products.
These increases were partially offset by strategic growth investments.Operating margins from International operations in 2015 were negatively affected by unfavorable sales mix and increased costs to support future sales growth initiatives, partially offset by a more favorable relationship between net selling prices and commodity costs, primarily related to plumbing products.
Although operating margins were not significantly impacted, foreign currency translation, primarily due to a stronger U.S. dollar, negatively impacted operating profit.Other MattersCommitments and ContingenciesLitigationInformation regarding our legal proceedings is set forth in Note S to the consolidated financial statements, which is incorporated herein by reference.Other CommitmentsWe enter into contracts, which include reasonable and customary indemnifications that are standard for the industries in which we operate.
Such indemnifications include claims made against builders by homeowners for issues relating to our products and workmanship.
In conjunction with divestitures and other transactions, we occasionally provide reasonable and customary indemnifications.
We have never had to pay a material amount related to these indemnifications, and we evaluate the probability that amounts may be incurred and record an estimated liability when probable and reasonably estimable.Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting PronouncementsRefer to Note A to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of recently adopted and issued accounting pronouncements, which is incorporated herein by reference.
32Contractual ObligationsThe following table provides payment obligations related to current contracts at December 31, 2017, in millions: Payments Due by Period 2018 2019-2020 2021-2022 Beyond2022 Other TotalDebt (A)$116 $205 $731 $2,057 $— $3,109Interest (A)152 288 236 776 — 1,452Operating leases50 71 45 91 — 257Currently payable income taxes6 — — — — 6Private equity funds (B)— — — — 5 5Purchase commitments (C)269 — — — — 269Uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties (D)— — — — 62 62Total$593 $564 $1,012 $2,924 $67 $5,160








(A)We assume that all debt would be held to maturity.
Amounts include capital lease obligations.
(B)There is no schedule for the capital commitments to the private equity funds; accordingly, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate as to when capital commitments may be paid.
(C)Excludes contracts that do not require volume commitments and open or pending purchase orders.
(D)Due to the high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows associated with uncertain tax positions, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate for the period beyond the next year in which cash settlements may occur with applicable tax authorities.Refer to Note L to the consolidated financial statements for defined-benefit pension plan obligations.33Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk.We have considered the provisions of accounting guidance regarding disclosure of accounting policies for derivative financial instruments and disclosure of quantitative and qualitative information about market risk inherent in derivative financial instruments and other financial instruments.We are exposed to the impact of changes in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates, particularly changes between the U.S. dollar and the European euro, British pound, and Canadian dollar, and to market price fluctuations related to our financial investments.
We have involvement with derivative financial instruments and use such instruments to the extent necessary to manage exposure to foreign currency fluctuations.
Refer to Note E to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our derivative instruments.At December 31, 2017, we performed sensitivity analyses to assess the potential loss in the fair values of market risk sensitive instruments resulting from a hypothetical change of 10 percent in foreign currency exchange rates, a 10 percent decline in the market value of our long-term investments, or a 100 basis point change in interest rates.
Based upon the analyses performed, such changes would not be expected to materially affect our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.34Item 8.Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.Management's Report on Internal Control Over Financial ReportingThe management of Masco Corporation is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting.
Masco Corporation's internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.The management of Masco Corporation assessed the effectiveness of the Company's internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017 using the criteria set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) in "Internal Control – Integrated Framework."
Based on this assessment, management has determined that the Company's internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2017.PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, performed an audit of the Company's consolidated financial statements and of the effectiveness of Masco Corporation's internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017.
Their report expressed an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of Masco Corporation's internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017 and expressed an unqualified opinion on the Company's 2017 consolidated financial statements.
This report appears under 'Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data' under the heading "Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
"35Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm To the Board of Directors and Shareholdersof Masco Corporation:Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial ReportingWe have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Masco Corporation and its subsidiaries as of December 31, 2017 and 2016, and the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income (loss), cash flows, and shareholders’ equity for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2017, including the related notes and the financial statement schedule listed in the index appearing under Item 15(a)(2) (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”).
We also have audited the Company's internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2017 and 2016, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2017 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the COSO.
Basis for OpinionsThe Company's management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in Management's Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting appearing under Item 8.
Our responsibility is to express opinions on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and on the Company's internal control over financial reporting based on our audits.
We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) ("PCAOB") and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks.
Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements.
Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements.
Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk.
Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial ReportingA company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding 36prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate./s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLPPricewaterhouseCoopers LLPDetroit, MichiganFebruary 8, 2018We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1959.
37Financial Statements and Supplementary DataMASCO CORPORATION and Consolidated SubsidiariesCONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETSDecember 31, 2017 and 2016(In Millions, Except Share Data) 2017 2016ASSETS Current Assets: Cash and cash investments$1,194 $990Short-term bank deposits108 201Receivables1,021 917Inventories796 712Prepaid expenses and other96 114Total current assets3,215 2,934Property and equipment, net1,129 1,060Goodwill841 832Other intangible assets, net187 154Other assets116 157Total assets$5,488 $5,137
LIABILITIES Current Liabilities: Accounts payable$824 $800Notes payable116 2Accrued liabilities688 658Total current liabilities1,628 1,460Long-term debt2,969 2,995Other liabilities715 785Total liabilities5,312 5,240
Commitments and contingencies (Note S)
 EQUITY Masco Corporation's shareholders' equity: Common shares, par value $1 per share
Authorized shares: 1,400,000,000;
Issued and outstanding: 2017 – 310,400,000; 2016 – 318,000,000310 318 Preferred shares authorized: 1,000,000;
Issued and outstanding: 2017 and 2016 – None— — Paid-in capital— — Retained deficit(305) (381) Accumulated other comprehensive loss(65) (235)Total Masco Corporation's shareholders' deficit(60) (298) Noncontrolling interest236 195Total equity (deficit)176 (103)Total liabilities and equity$5,488 $5,137See notes to consolidated financial statements.38MASCO CORPORATION and Consolidated SubsidiariesCONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONSFor the Years Ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015(In Millions, Except Per Common Share Data) 2017 2016 2015Net sales$7,644 $7,357 $7,142Cost of sales5,033 4,901 4,889Gross profit2,611 2,456 2,253Selling, general and administrative expenses1,442 1,403 1,339Operating profit1,169 1,053 914Other income (expense), net:
 Interest expense(278) (229) (225)Other, net(6) 6 — (284) (223) (225)Income from continuing operations before income taxes885 830 689Income tax expense305 296 293Income from continuing operations580 534 396Loss from discontinued operations, net— — (2)Net income580 534 394Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest47 43 39Net income attributable to Masco Corporation$533 $491 $355
Income (loss) per common share attributable to Masco Corporation:
Basic:
 Income from continuing operations$1.68 $1.49 $1.04Loss from discontinued operations, net— — (0.01)Net income$1.68 $1.49 $1.03Diluted:
 Income from continuing operations$1.66 $1.47 $1.03Loss from discontinued operations, net— — (0.01)Net income$1.66 $1.47 $1.02
Amounts attributable to Masco Corporation:
 Income from continuing operations$533 $491 $357Loss from discontinued operations, net— — (2)Net income$533 $491 $355 See notes to consolidated financial statements.39MASCO CORPORATION and Consolidated SubsidiariesCONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)For the Years Ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015(In Millions) 2017 2016 2015Net income$580 $534 $394Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest47 43 39Net income attributable to Masco Corporation$533 $491 $355Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax (Note N):
 Cumulative translation adjustment$133 $(78) $(96)Interest rate swaps3 1 2Pension and other post-retirement benefits63 (15) 26Realized loss on available-for-sale securities— 12 —Other comprehensive income (loss)199 (80) (68)Less: Other comprehensive income (loss) attributable to the noncontrolling interest:
 Cumulative translation adjustment$28 $(10) $(16)Pension and other post-retirement benefits1 — 2 29 (10) (14)Other comprehensive income (loss) attributable to Masco Corporation$170 $(70) $(54)Total comprehensive income$779 $454 $326Less: Total comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interest

76 33 25Total comprehensive income attributable to Masco Corporation$703 $421 $301 See notes to consolidated financial statements.40MASCO CORPORATION and Consolidated SubsidiariesCONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWSFor the Years Ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015(In Millions) 2017 2016 2015CASH FLOWS FROM (FOR) OPERATING ACTIVITIES:
 Net income$580 $534 $394Depreciation and amortization127 134 133Display amortization25 25 20Deferred income taxes10 130 212Employee withholding taxes paid on stock-based compensation33 40 36(Gain) on disposition of investments, net(4) (4) (7)Loss on disposition of businesses, net13 — —Pension and other postretirement benefits(38) (78) (18)Impairment of financial investments, net2 — —Impairment of property and equipment, net— — 2Stock-based compensation38 29 41Increase in receivables(127) (120) (104)(Increase) decrease in inventories(76) (39) 17Increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, net53 71 82Debt extinguishment costs104 40 —Other, net11 27 2Net cash from operating activities751 789 810
CASH FLOWS FROM (FOR) FINANCING ACTIVITIES:
 Retirement of notes(535) (1,300) (500)Purchase of Company common stock(331) (459) (456)Cash dividends paid(129) (128) (126)Dividends paid to noncontrolling interest(35) (31) (36)Cash distributed to TopBuild Corp. — — (63)Issuance of TopBuild Corp. debt— — 200Issuance of notes, net of issuance costs593 889 497Debt extinguishment costs(104) (40) —Increase in debt2 3 4Issuance of Company common stock— 1 2Employee withholding taxes paid on stock-based compensation(33) (40) (36)Payment of debt(5) (4) (4)Credit Agreement and other financing costs— — (3)Net cash for financing activities(577) (1,109) (521)
CASH FLOWS FROM (FOR) INVESTING ACTIVITIES:
 Capital expenditures(173) (180) (158)Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired(89) — (41)Proceeds from disposition of: Businesses, net of cash disposed128 — —Short-term bank deposits218 251 279Property and equipment24 — 18Other financial investments7 32 10Purchases of short-term bank deposits(106) (211) (253)Other, net(34) (16) (44)Net cash for investing activities(25) (124) (189)Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash investments55 (34) (15)
CASH AND CASH INVESTMENTS:
 Increase (decrease) for the year204 (478) 85At January 1990 1,468 1,383At December 31$1,194 $990 $1,468See notes to consolidated financial statements.41MASCO CORPORATION and Consolidated SubsidiariesCONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITYFor the Years Ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015(In Millions, Except Per Common Share Data) Total CommonShares($1 par value) Paid-InCapital RetainedEarnings (Deficit) AccumulatedOtherComprehensive(Loss) Income NoncontrollingInterestBalance, January 1, 2015$1,128 $345 $— $690 $(111) $204Total comprehensive income (loss)326
 355 (54) 25Shares issued(15) 3 (18)
Shares retired:
Repurchased(456) (17) (65) (374)
Surrendered (non-cash)(18) (1) (17)
Cash dividends declared(126)
 (126)
Dividends paid to noncontrolling interest(36)
 (36)Separation of TopBuild Corp. (828)
 (828)
Stock-based compensation83 83 Balance, December 31, 2015$58 $330 $— $(300) $(165) $193Total comprehensive income (loss)454
 491 (70) 33Shares issued(24) 3 (27)
Shares retired:

 Repurchased(459) (15) (14) (430)
Surrendered (non-cash)(14)
(14)
Cash dividends declared(128)
 (128)
Dividends paid to noncontrolling interest(31)
 (31)Stock-based compensation41 41
Balance, December 31, 2016$(103) $318 $— $(381) $(235) $195Total comprehensive income779
 533 170 76Shares issued(19) 2 (21)
Shares retired:

 Repurchased(331) (9) (8) (314)
Surrendered (non-cash)(15) (1) (14)
Cash dividends declared(129)
 (129)
Dividends paid to noncontrolling interest(35)
 (35)Stock-based compensation29 29
Balance, December 31, 2017$176 $310 $— $(305) $(65) $236See notes to consolidated financial statements.42MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTSA.
ACCOUNTING POLICIESPrinciples of Consolidation.
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Masco Corporation and all majority-owned subsidiaries.
All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated.
We consolidate the assets, liabilities and results of operations of variable interest entities for which we are the primary beneficiary.Use of Estimates and Assumptions in the Preparation of Financial Statements.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of any contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions.Revenue Recognition.
We recognize revenue as title to products and risk of loss is transferred to customers or when services are rendered, net of applicable provisions for discounts, returns and allowances.
Amounts billed for shipping and handling are included in net sales, while costs incurred for shipping and handling are included in cost of sales.Customer Promotion Costs.
We record estimated reductions to revenue for customer programs and incentive offerings, including special pricing and certain co-operative advertising arrangements, promotions and other volume-based incentives.
In-store displays that are owned by us and used to market our products are included in other assets in the consolidated balance sheets and are amortized using the straight-line method over the expected useful life of three to five years; related amortization expense is classified as a selling expense in the consolidated statement of operations.Foreign Currency.
The financial statements of our foreign subsidiaries are measured using the local currency as the functional currency.
Assets and liabilities of these subsidiaries are translated at exchange rates as of the balance sheet dates.
Revenues and expenses are translated at average exchange rates in effect during the year.
The resulting cumulative translation adjustments have been recorded in the accumulated other comprehensive loss component of shareholders' equity.
Realized foreign currency transaction gains and losses are included in the consolidated statements of operations in other income (expense), net.Cash and Cash Investments.
We consider all highly liquid investments with an initial maturity of three months or less to be cash and cash investments.Short-Term Bank Deposits.
We invest a portion of our foreign excess cash in short-term bank deposits.
These highly liquid investments have original maturities between three and twelve months and are valued at cost, which approximates fair value at December 31, 2017 and 2016.
These short-term bank deposits are classified in the current assets section of our consolidated balance sheets, and interest income related to short-term bank deposits is recorded in our consolidated statements of operations in other income (expense), net.Receivables.
We do significant business with a number of customers, including certain home center retailers and homebuilders.
We monitor our exposure for credit losses on our customer receivable balances and the credit worthiness of our customers on an on-going basis and record related allowances for doubtful accounts.
Allowances are estimated based upon specific customer balances, where a risk of default has been identified, and also include a provision for non-customer specific defaults based upon historical collection, return and write-off activity.
A separate allowance is recorded for customer incentive rebates and is generally based upon sales activity.
Receivables are presented net of certain allowances (including allowances for doubtful accounts) of $44 million and $40 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.Property and Equipment.
Property and equipment, including significant improvements to existing facilities, are recorded at cost.
Upon retirement or disposal, the cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any gain or loss is included in the consolidated statements of operations.
Maintenance and repair costs are charged against earnings as incurred.We review our property and equipment as events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the property and equipment below the carrying amount.
If the carrying amount of property and equipment is not recoverable from its undiscounted cash flows, then we would recognize an impairment loss for the difference between the carrying amount and the current fair value.
Further, we evaluate the remaining useful lives of property and equipment at each reporting period to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining depreciation periods.43MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)A.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)Depreciation.
Depreciation expense is computed principally using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
Annual depreciation rates are as follows: buildings and land improvements, 2 to 10 percent, computer hardware and software, 17 to 33 percent, and machinery and equipment, 5 to 33 percent.
Depreciation expense was $116 million, $124 million and $116 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets.
We perform our annual impairment testing of goodwill in the fourth quarter of each year, or as events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount.
We have defined our reporting units and completed the impairment testing of goodwill at the operating segment level.
Our operating segments are reporting units that engage in business activities, for which discrete financial information, including five-year forecasts, are available.
We compare the fair value of the reporting units to the carrying value of the reporting units for goodwill impairment testing.
Fair value is determined using a discounted cash flow method, which includes significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 inputs), and requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including long-term projections of cash flows, market conditions and appropriate discount rates.
Our judgments are based upon historical experience, current market trends, consultations with external valuation specialists and other information.
While we believe that the estimates and assumptions underlying the valuation methodology are reasonable, different estimates and assumptions could result in different outcomes.
In estimating future cash flows, we rely on internally generated five-year forecasts for sales and operating profits, including capital expenditures, and, currently, a two percent long-term assumed annual growth rate of cash flows for periods after the five-year forecast.
We utilize our weighted average cost of capital of approximately 8.0 percent as the basis to determine the discount rate to apply to the estimated future cash flows.
In 2017, based upon our assessment of the risks impacting each of our businesses, we applied a risk premium to increase the discount rate to a range of 10.0 percent to 13.0 percent for our reporting units.If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized to the extent that a reporting unit's carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill in that reporting unit.We review our other indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually, in the fourth quarter, or as events occur or circumstances change that indicate the assets may be impaired without regard to the business unit.
We consider the implications of both external (e.g., market growth, competition and local economic conditions) and internal (e.g., product sales and expected product growth) factors and their potential impact on cash flows related to the intangible asset in both the near- and long-term.Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives.
We evaluate the remaining useful lives of amortizable intangible assets at each reporting period to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization.
Refer to Note G to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding goodwill and other intangible assets.Fair Value Accounting.
We use derivative financial instruments to manage certain exposure to fluctuations in earnings and cash flows resulting from changes in foreign currency exchange rates, and occasionally from changes in commodity costs and interest rate exposures.
Derivative financial instruments are recorded in the consolidated balance sheets as either an asset or liability measured at fair value, netted by counterparty, where the right of offset exists.
The gain or loss is recognized in determining current earnings during the period of the change in fair value.
We currently do not have any derivative instruments for which we have designated hedge accounting.Warranty.
We offer full and limited warranties on certain products with warranty periods ranging up to the lifetime of the product to the original consumer purchaser.
At the time of sale, we accrue a warranty liability for the estimated future cost to provide products, parts or services to repair or replace products to satisfy our warranty obligations.
Our estimate of future costs to service our warranty obligations is based upon the information available and includes a number of factors, such as the warranty coverage, the warranty period, historical experience specific to the nature, frequency and average cost to service the claim, along with industry and demographic trends.Certain factors and related assumptions in determining our warranty liability involve judgments and estimates and are sensitive to changes in the factors described above.
We believe that the warranty accrual is appropriate; however, actual claims incurred could differ from our original estimates which would require us to adjust our previously established accruals.
Refer to Note S to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on our warranty accrual.44MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)A.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)A significant portion of our business is at the consumer retail level through home center retailers and other major retailers.
A consumer may return a product to a retail outlet that is a warranty return.
However, certain retail outlets do not distinguish between warranty and other types of returns when they claim a return deduction from us.
Our revenue recognition policy takes into account this type of return when recognizing revenue, and an estimate of these amounts is recorded as a deduction to net sales at the time of sale.Insurance Reserves.
We provide for expenses associated with workers' compensation and product liability obligations when such amounts are probable and can be reasonably estimated.
The accruals are adjusted as new information develops or circumstances change that would affect the estimated liability.
Any obligations expected to be settled within 12 months are recorded in accrued liabilities; all other obligations are recorded in other liabilities.Stock-Based Compensation.
We measure compensation expense for stock awards at the market price of our common stock at the grant date.
Such expense is recognized ratably over the shorter of the vesting period of the stock awards, typically 5 or 10 years, or the length of time until the grantee becomes retirement-eligible at age 65.
We measure compensation expense for stock options using a Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Such expense is recognized ratably over the shorter of the vesting period of the stock options, typically five years, or the length of time until the grantee becomes retirement-eligible at age 65.
We recognize forfeitures related to stock awards and stock options as they occur.Noncontrolling Interest.
We owned 68 percent of Hansgrohe SE at both December 31, 2017 and 2016.
The aggregate noncontrolling interest, net of dividends, at December 31, 2017 and 2016 has been recorded as a component of equity on our consolidated balance sheets.Interest and Penalties on Uncertain Tax Positions.
We record interest and penalties on our uncertain tax positions in income tax expense (benefit).Accounting for Global Intangible Low-taxed Income ("GILTI").
We record the tax effects of GILTI related to our foreign operations as a component of income tax expense (benefit) in the period the tax arises.Reclassifications.
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the 2017 presentation in the consolidated financial statements.
In our consolidated statements of cash flows, the cash flows from discontinued operations are not separately classified.Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements.
In July 2015, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2015-11, "Inventory (Topic 330): Simplifying the Measurement of Inventory," which requires that inventory within the scope of the guidance be measured at the lower of cost and net realizable value, as opposed to the lower of cost or market.
We adopted ASU 2015-11 on January 1, 2017.
The adoption of the new standard did not have an impact on our financial position or results of operations.In March 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-09, “Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting,” which requires the tax effects related to share-based payments to be recorded through the income statement, simplifies the accounting requirements for forfeitures and employers' tax withholding requirements, and modifies the presentation of certain items on the statement of cash flows.
We adopted ASU 2016-09 on January 1, 2017, using the retrospective options for reclassifying excess tax benefit from stock-based compensation and employee withholding taxes paid on stock-based compensation within our statements of cash flows.
The adoption of the remaining requirements did not have an impact on our financial position or results of operations.
As a result of this adoption, we increased cash flows from (for) operating activities and decreased cash flows from (for) financing activities by $63 million and $111 million for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Subsequent to adoption, tax effects related to employee share-based payments were recorded to income tax expense, thus increasing the volatility in our effective tax rate.In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-01, "Business Combinations (Topic 805): Clarifying the Definition of a Business," which narrows the definition of what constitutes a business for acquisition and divestiture purposes.
We early adopted ASU 2017-01 effective October 1, 2017.
The adoption of the new standard did not have an impact on our financial position or results of operations.45MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)A.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04, "Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment," which removes Step 2 of the goodwill impairment test.
A goodwill impairment will now be the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill in the reporting unit.
We early adopted ASU 2017-04 effective January 1, 2017.
The adoption of the new standard did not have an impact on our financial position or results of operations.Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements.
In May 2014, the FASB issued a new standard for revenue recognition, Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 606.
The purpose of ASC 606 is to provide a single, comprehensive revenue recognition model for all contracts with customers to improve comparability across industries.
The standard allows for either a full retrospective or modified retrospective method of adoption.
We will adopt this standard on its effective date, January 1, 2018, under the full retrospective method of adoption.
The adoption of the standard will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
We have finalized our accounting policy, trained our business units on the new standard and finalized our internal controls under the new standard.
We did not experience significant issues in our implementation process.In January 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-01, “Financial Instruments-Overall: Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities,” which primarily affects the accounting for equity investments, financial liabilities under the fair value option, and the presentation and disclosure requirements for financial instruments.
ASU 2016-01 is effective for us for annual periods beginning January 1, 2018.
The adoption of this standard will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.In February 2016, the FASB issued a new standard for leases, ASC 842, which changes the accounting model for identifying and accounting for leases.
ASC 842 is effective for us for annual periods beginning January 1, 2019 and currently requires retrospective application.
We expect this standard to increase our total assets and total liabilities; however, we are currently evaluating the magnitude of the impact the adoption of this new standard will have on our financial position and results of operations.In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, "Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments," which modifies the methodology for recognizing loss impairments on certain types of financial instruments.
The new methodology requires an entity to estimate the credit losses expected over the life of an exposure.
Additionally, ASU 2016-13 amends the current available-for-sale security other-than-temporary impairment model for debt securities.
ASU 2016-13 is effective for us for annual periods beginning January 1, 2020.
We are currently evaluating the impact the adoption of this new standard will have on our financial position and results of operations.In October 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-16, "Income Taxes (Topic 740): Intra-Entity Asset Transfers of Assets Other than Inventory," which no longer allows the tax effects of intra-entity asset transfers (intercompany sales) of assets other than inventory to be deferred until the transferred asset is sold to a third party or otherwise recovered through use.
The new standard requires the tax expense from the sale of the asset in the seller’s tax jurisdiction and the corresponding basis differences in the buyer’s jurisdiction to be recognized when the transfer occurs even though the pre-tax effects of the transaction are eliminated in consolidation.
ASU 2016-16 is effective for us for annual periods beginning January 1, 2018.
The adoption of this standard will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.In March 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-07, "Compensation-Retirement Benefits (Topic 715): Improving the Presentation of Net Periodic Pension Cost and Net Periodic Postretirement Benefit Cost," which modifies the presentation of net periodic pension and post-retirement benefit cost ("net benefit cost") in the income statement and the components eligible for capitalization as assets.
ASU 2017-07 is effective for us for annual periods beginning January 1, 2018.
The adoption of the new standard will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
For full year 2017 and 2016, we expect $26 million and $32 million of expense to be retrospectively reclassified from operating profit to other income (expense), net, within our results of operations.In May 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-09, "Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Scope of Modification Accounting," which clarifies when to account for a change to the terms or conditions of a share-based payment award as a modification.
ASU 2017-09 is effective for us for annual periods beginning January 1, 2018, and is applied prospectively.
Upon adoption, modification accounting is required only if the fair value, the vesting conditions, or the classification of the award (as equity or liability) changes as a result of the change in terms or conditions.46MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)A.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Concluded)In August 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-12, "Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815): Targeted Improvements to Accounting for Hedging Activities," which improves and simplifies accounting rules around hedge accounting and better portrays the economic results of an entity’s risk management activities in its financial statements.
ASU 2017-12 is effective for us for annual periods beginning January 1, 2019.
We are currently evaluating the impact the adoption of this new standard will have on our financial position and results of operations.B.
DIVESTITURESIn the fourth quarter of 2017 we divested Moores Furniture Group Limited ("Moores"), a manufacturer of kitchen and bathroom furniture in the United Kingdom.
In connection with the divestiture we recognized a loss of $64 million for the year ended December 31, 2017, included in other, net, within other income (expense), net in our consolidated statement of operations.
This loss resulted primarily from the recognition of $58 million of defined-benefit pension plan actuarial losses, net of tax, that were previously included within accumulated other comprehensive loss, due to the transfer of the plan assets and obligations to the purchaser in connection with the sale of the business.
Prior to divestiture, the results of this business are included within income from continuing operations before income taxes in the consolidated statement of operations and reported as part of our Cabinetry Products segment.In the second quarter of 2017 we divested Arrow Fastener Co., LLC ("Arrow"), a manufacturer and distributor of fastening tools, for proceeds of $128 million.
In connection with the divestiture we recognized a gain of $51 million for the year ended December 31, 2017, included in other, net, within other income (expense), net in our consolidated statement of operations.
Prior to divestiture, the results of this business are included within income from continuing operations before income taxes in the consolidated statement of operations and reported as part of our Windows and Other Specialty Products segment.
The presentation of discontinued operations includes a component or group of components that we have or intend to dispose of, and represents a strategic shift that has (or will have) a major effect on our operations and financial results.
For spin off transactions, discontinued operations treatment is appropriate following the completion of the spin off.On September 30, 2014, we announced a plan to spin off 100 percent of our Installation and Other Services businesses into an independent, publicly-traded company named TopBuild Corp. ("TopBuild") through a tax-free distribution of the stock of TopBuild to our stockholders.
We initiated the spin off as TopBuild was no longer considered core to our long-term growth strategy in branded building products.
On June 30, 2015, immediately prior to the effective time of the spin off, TopBuild paid a cash distribution to us of $200 million using the proceeds of its new debt financing arrangement.
This transaction was reported as a financing activity in the consolidated statements of cash flows.
We have accounted for the spin off of TopBuild as a discontinued operation.
Losses from this discontinued operation were included in loss from discontinued operations, net, in the consolidated statement of operations.47MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)B.
DIVESTITURES (Concluded)The major classes of line items constituting pre-tax (loss) profit of the discontinued operation, in millions: Year Ended December 31, 2015Net sales$762Cost of sales603Gross profit159Selling, general and administrative expenses148Income from discontinued operations$11Other discontinued operations results: Loss on disposal of discontinued operations, net(1)Income before income tax10Income tax expense (1)(12)Loss from discontinued operations, net$(2)








(1)The unusual relationship between income tax expense and income before income tax resulted primarily from certain non-deductible transaction costs related to the spin off of TopBuild.Other selected financial information for TopBuild during the period owned by us, was as follows, in millions: Year Ended December 31, 2015Depreciation and amortization$6Capital expenditures$7We did not have any assets or liabilities related to discontinued operations at either December 31, 2017 or 2016.In conjunction with the spin off, we entered into a Transition Services Agreement with TopBuild under which we provided administrative services to TopBuild subsequent to the separation.
This agreement terminated on June 30, 2016.
The fees for services rendered under the Transition Services Agreement are not material to our results of operations.C.
ACQUISITIONSIn the fourth quarter of 2017, we acquired Mercury Plastics, Inc., a plastics processor and manufacturer of water handling systems for appliance and faucet applications, for approximately $89 million in cash.
This business is included in the Plumbing Products segment.
This acquisition enhances our ability to develop faucet technology and provides continuity of supply of quality faucet components.
In connection with this acquisition, we recognized $38 million of goodwill, which is tax deductible, and is related primarily to the expected synergies from combining the operations into our business.In the second quarter of 2015, we acquired a U.K. window business for approximately $16 million in cash in the Windows and Other Specialty Products segment.
This acquisition will support our U.K. window business' growth strategy by expanding its product offerings into timber-alternative windows and doors.In the first quarter of 2015, we acquired an aquatic fitness business for approximately $25 million in cash in the Plumbing Products segment.
This acquisition will allow our spa business to expand its wellness products platform, open new channels of distribution and access a new customer base.These acquisitions are not material to us.
The results of these acquisitions are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date of their respective acquisition.48MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)C. ACQUISITIONS (Concluded)In December 2017, we signed a definitive agreement to acquire The L.D.
Kichler Co., a leader in decorative residential and light commercial lighting products, ceiling fans and LED lighting systems.
This business will expand our product offerings to repair and remodel customers.
We expect this transaction to close in the first quarter of 2018, at which time we expect to pay approximately $550 million for the business, using cash on hand.
We intend to report this business in our Decorative Architectural Products segment.D.
INVENTORIES (In Millions)At December 31 2017 2016Finished goods$414 $366Raw materials277 254Work in process105 92Total$796 $712Inventories, which include purchased parts, materials, direct labor and applied overhead, are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined by use of the first-in, first-out method.E.
DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS AND HEDGING ACTIVITIESWe are exposed to global market risk as part of our normal, daily business activities.
To manage these risks, we enter into various derivative contracts.
These contracts may include interest rate swap agreements, foreign currency contracts and metals contracts.
We review our hedging program, derivative positions and overall risk management on a regular basis.Interest Rate Swap Agreements.
In 2012, in connection with the issuance of $400 million of debt, we terminated the interest rate swap hedge relationships that we had entered into in 2011.
These interest rate swaps were designated as cash flow hedges and effectively fixed interest rates on the forecasted debt issuance to variable rates based on 3-month LIBOR.
Upon termination, the ineffective portion of the cash flow hedges of an approximate $2 million loss was recognized in our consolidated statement of operations in other, net, within other income (expense), net.
The remaining loss of approximately $23 million from the termination of these swaps is being amortized as an increase to interest expense over the remaining term of the debt, through March 2022.
At December 31, 2017, the balance remaining in accumulated other comprehensive loss was $8 million (pre-tax).Foreign Currency Contracts.
Our net cash inflows and outflows exposed to the risk of changes in foreign currency exchange rates arise from the sale of products in countries other than the manufacturing source, foreign currency denominated supplier payments, debt and other payables, and investments in subsidiaries.
To mitigate this risk, we, including certain European operations, enter into foreign currency forward contracts and foreign currency exchange contracts.Gains (losses) related to foreign currency forward and exchange contracts are recorded in our consolidated statements of operations in other income (expense), net.
In the event that the counterparties fail to meet the terms of the foreign currency forward or exchange contracts, our exposure is limited to the aggregate foreign currency rate differential with such institutions.Metals Contracts.
From time to time, we have entered into contracts to manage our exposure to increases in the price of copper and zinc.
Gains (losses) related to these contracts are recorded in our consolidated statements of operations in cost of sales.49MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)E. DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS AND HEDGING ACTIVITIES (Concluded)The pre-tax (losses) gains included in our consolidated statements of operations are as follows, in millions: Year Ended December 31, 2017 2016 2015Foreign currency contracts:
 Exchange contracts$(1) $— $4Forward contracts1 — (3)Metals contracts— 5 (17)Interest rate swaps(4) (2) (2)Total$(4) $3 $(18)We present our derivatives net by counterparty, due to the right of offset under master netting arrangements in the consolidated balance sheets.
The notional amounts being hedged and the fair value of those derivative instruments are as follows, in millions: At December 31, 2017 Notional Amount Balance SheetForeign currency contracts: Exchange contracts$14 Accrued liabilities $—Forward contracts43 Receivables —Accrued liabilities — At December 31, 2016 Notional Amount Balance SheetForeign currency contracts: Forward contracts$21 Accrued liabilities $(2)Metals contracts1 Accrued liabilities —The fair value of all foreign currency and metals derivative contracts is estimated on a recurring basis, quarterly, using Level 2 inputs (significant other observable inputs).50MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)F. PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT (In Millions)At December 31 2017 2016Land and improvements$110 $111Buildings681 712Computer hardware and software327 315Machinery and equipment1,547 1,480 2,665 2,618Less: Accumulated depreciation(1,536) (1,558)Total$1,129 $1,060We lease certain equipment and plant facilities under noncancellable operating leases.
Rental expense recorded in the consolidated statements of operations totaled approximately $66 million, $63 million and $60 million during 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.At December 31, 2017, future minimum lease payments were as follows, in millions:2018$502019392020322021252022202023 and beyond9151MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)G. GOODWILL AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETSThe changes in the carrying amount of goodwill, by segment, were as follows, in millions: Gross Goodwill At December 31, 2017 AccumulatedImpairmentLosses Net Goodwill At December 31, 2017Plumbing Products$574 $(340) $234Decorative Architectural Products294 (75) 219Cabinetry Products181 — 181Windows and Other Specialty Products718 (511) 207Total$1,767 $(926) $841 Gross Goodwill At December 31, 2016 AccumulatedImpairmentLosses Net Goodwill At December 31, 2016 Additions (A) Divestitures (B) Other (C) Net Goodwill At December 31, 2017Plumbing Products$519 $(340) $179 $38 $— $17 $234Decorative Architectural Products294 (75) 219 — — — 219Cabinetry Products240 (59) 181 — — — 181Windows and Other Specialty Products987 (734) 253 — (47) 1 207Total$2,040 $(1,208) $832 $38 $(47) $18 $841 Gross Goodwill At December 31, 2015 AccumulatedImpairmentLosses Net Goodwill At December 31, 2015 Other (C) Net Goodwill At December 31, 2016Plumbing Products$525 $(340) $185 $(6) $179Decorative Architectural Products294 (75) 219 — 219Cabinetry Products240 (59) 181 — 181Windows and Other Specialty Products988 (734) 254 (1) 253Total$2,047 $(1,208) $839 $(7) $832









 (A)Additions consist of acquisitions.
(B)Included within divestitures is the disposition of Moores in the Cabinetry Products segment, which includes $59 million of both gross goodwill and accumulated impairment losses, and the disposition of Arrow in the Windows and Other Specialty Products segment, which includes $270 million of gross goodwill and $223 million of accumulated impairment losses.
(C)Other consists of the effect of foreign currency translation.We completed our annual impairment testing of goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets in the fourth quarters of 2017, 2016 and 2015.
There was no impairment of goodwill for any of our reporting units for any of these years.Other indefinite-lived intangible assets were $140 million and $136 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively, and principally included registered trademarks.
In 2017, 2016 and 2015, the impairment test indicated there was no impairment of other indefinite-lived intangible assets for any of our business units.
As a result of our 2017 and 2015 acquisitions, other indefinite lived intangible assets increased by $5 million and $7 million, respectively, as of the acquisition dates.52MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)G. GOODWILL AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS (Concluded)The carrying value of our definite-lived intangible assets was $47 million (net of accumulated amortization of $10 million) at December 31, 2017 and $18 million (net of accumulated amortization of $16 million) at December 31, 2016 and principally included customer relationships with a weighted average amortization period of 12 years in 2017 and 10 years in 2016.
Amortization expense related to the definite-lived intangible assets of continuing operations was $4 million, $4 million and $6 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
As a result of our 2017 and 2015 acquisitions, definite-lived intangible assets increased by $26 million and $17 million, respectively, as of the acquisition dates.At December 31, 2017, amortization expense related to the definite-lived intangible assets during each of the next five years was as follows: 2018 – $6 million; 2019 – $5 million; 2020 – $5 million, 2021 – $5 million and 2022 –$5 million.H.
OTHER ASSETS (In Millions)At December 31 2017 2016Equity method investments$11 $13Private equity funds2 5In-store displays, net31 42Deferred tax assets (Note Q)48 68Other24 29Total$116 $157In-store displays are amortized using the straight-line method over the expected useful life of three to five years, and we recognized amortization expense related to in-store displays of $25 million, $25 million and $20 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Cash spent for displays was $14 million, $11 million and $43 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively, and is included in other, net within investing activities on the consolidated statements of cash flows.I.
ACCRUED LIABILITIES (In Millions)At December 31 2017 2016Salaries, wages and commissions$196 $191Advertising and sales promotion157 146Interest42 51Warranty (Note S)59 56Employee retirement plans50 52Insurance reserves40 41Property, payroll and other taxes27 19Dividends payable33 32Other84 70Total$688 $65853MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)J.
DEBT (In Millions)At December 31 2017 2016Notes and debentures: 6.625%, due April 15, 2018$114 $1147.125%, due March 15, 2020201 5003.500%, due April 1, 2021399 3995.950%, due March 15, 2022326 4004.450%, due April 1, 2025500 5004.375%, due April 1, 2026498 4983.500%, due November 15, 2027300 —7.750%, due August 1, 2029234 2966.500%, due August 15, 2032200 3004.500%, due May 15, 2047299 —Other33 9Prepaid debt issuance costs(19) (19) 3,085 2,997Less: Current portion116 2Total long-term debt$2,969 $2,995All of the notes and debentures above are senior indebtedness and, other than the 6.625% notes due 2018 and the 7.75% notes due 2029, are redeemable at our option.
On June 21, 2017, we issued $300 million of 3.5% Notes due November 15, 2027 and $300 million of 4.5% Notes due May 15, 2047.
We received proceeds of $599 million, net of discount, for the issuance of these Notes.
The Notes are senior indebtedness and are redeemable at our option at the applicable redemption price.
On June 27, 2017, proceeds from the debt issuances, together with cash on hand, were used to repay and early retire $299 million of our 7.125% Notes due March 15, 2020, $74 million of our 5.95% Notes due March 15, 2022, $62 million of our 7.75% Notes due August 1, 2029, and $100 million of our 6.5% Notes due August 15, 2032.
In connection with these early retirements, we incurred a loss on debt extinguishment of $107 million, which was recorded as interest expense.
On March 17, 2016, we issued $400 million of 3.5% Notes due April 1, 2021 and $500 million of 4.375% Notes due April 1, 2026.
We received proceeds of $896 million, net of discount, for the issuance of these Notes.
The Notes are senior indebtedness and are redeemable at our option at the applicable redemption price.
On April 15, 2016, proceeds from the debt issuances, together with cash on hand, were used to repay and early retire all of our $1 billion, 6.125% Notes which were due on October 3, 2016 and all of our $300 million, 5.85% Notes which were due on March 15, 2017.
In connection with these early retirements, we incurred $40 million of debt extinguishment costs, which we recorded as interest expense.
On June 15, 2015, we repaid and retired all of our $500 million, 4.8% Notes on the scheduled retirement date.On March 24, 2015, we issued $500 million of 4.45% Notes due April 1, 2025.On March 28, 2013, we entered into a credit agreement (the "Credit Agreement") with a bank group, with an aggregate commitment of $1.25 billion and a maturity date of March 28, 2018.
On May 29, 2015 and August 28, 2015, we amended the Credit Agreement with the bank group (the "Amended Credit Agreement").
The Amended Credit Agreement reduces the aggregate commitment to $750 million and extends the maturity date to May 29, 2020.
Under the Amended Credit Agreement, at our request and subject to certain conditions, we can increase the aggregate commitment up to an additional $375 million with the current bank group or new lenders.54MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)J.
DEBT (Concluded)The Amended Credit Agreement provides for an unsecured revolving credit facility available to us and one of our foreign subsidiaries, in U.S. dollars, European euros and certain other currencies.
Borrowings under the revolver denominated in euros are limited to $500 million, equivalent.
We can also borrow swingline loans up to $75 million and obtain letters of credit of up to $100 million; any outstanding letters of credit under the Amended Credit Agreement reduce our borrowing capacity.
At December 31, 2017, we had no of outstanding standby letters of credit under the Amended Credit Agreement.Revolving credit loans bear interest under the Amended Credit Agreement, at our option, at (A) a rate per annum equal to the greater of (i) the prime rate, (ii) the Federal Funds effective rate plus 0.50% and (iii) LIBOR plus 1.0% (the "Alternative Base Rate"); plus an applicable margin based upon our then-applicable corporate credit ratings; or (B) LIBOR plus an applicable margin based upon our then-applicable corporate credit ratings.
The foreign currency revolving credit loans bear interest at a rate equal to LIBOR plus an applicable margin based upon our then-applicable corporate credit ratings.The Amended Credit Agreement contains financial covenants requiring us to maintain (A) a maximum net leverage ratio, as adjusted for certain items, of 4.0 to 1.0, and (B) a minimum interest coverage ratio, as adjusted for certain items, equal to or greater than 2.5 to 1.0.In order for us to borrow under the Amended Credit Agreement, there must not be any default in our covenants in the Amended Credit Agreement (i.e., in addition to the two financial covenants, principally limitations on subsidiary debt, negative pledge restrictions, legal compliance requirements and maintenance of properties and insurance) and our representations and warranties in the Amended Credit Agreement must be true in all material respects on the date of borrowing (i.e., principally no material adverse change or litigation likely to result in a material adverse change, since December 31, 2014, in each case, no material ERISA or environmental non-compliance, and no material tax deficiency).
We were in compliance with all covenants and no borrowings have been made at December 31, 2017.At December 31, 2017, the debt maturities during each of the next five years were as follows: 2018 – $116 million; 2019– $2 million; 2020 – $203 million; 2021 – $402 million and 2022 – $329 million.Interest paid was $175 million, $198 million and $216 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
These amounts exclude $104 million and $40 million of debt extinguishment costs related to the early retirement of debt, which were recorded as interest expense and paid in 2017 and 2016, respectively.Fair Value of Debt.
The fair value of our short-term and long-term fixed-rate debt instruments is based principally upon modeled market prices for the same or similar issues, which are Level 1 inputs.
The aggregate estimated market value of short-term and long-term debt at December 31, 2017 was approximately $3.3 billion, compared with the aggregate carrying value of $3.1 billion.
The aggregate estimated market value of short-term and long-term debt at December 31, 2016 was approximately $3.3 billion, compared with the aggregate carrying value of $3.0 billion.K.
STOCK-BASED COMPENSATIONOur 2014 Long Term Stock Incentive Plan (the "2014 Plan") replaced the 2005 Long Term Stock Incentive Plan in May 2014 and provides for the issuance of stock-based incentives in various forms to employees and non-employee Directors of the Company.
At December 31, 2017, outstanding stock-based incentives were in the form of long-term stock awards, stock options, restricted stock units, phantom stock awards and stock appreciation rights.Pre-tax compensation expense for these stock-based incentives were as follows, in millions: 2017 2016 2015Long-term stock awards$24 $23 $23Stock options3 2 5Restricted stock units2 — —Phantom stock awards and stock appreciation rights9 4 11Total$38 $29 $3955MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)K. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION (Continued)At December 31, 2017, 15.4 million shares of our common stock were available under the 2014 Plan for the granting of long-term stock incentive awards, stock options and restricted stock units.Long-Term Stock Awards.
Long-term stock awards are granted to our key employees and non-employee Directors and do not cause net share dilution, as we repurchase and retire an equal number of shares in the open market.
We granted 853,690 shares of long-term stock awards during 2017.Our long-term stock award activity was as follows, shares in millions: 2017 2016 2015Unvested stock award shares at January 14 5 6Weighted average grant date fair value$20 $17 $18Stock award shares granted1 1 1Weighted average grant date fair value$34 $26 $26Stock award shares vested2 2 2Weighted average grant date fair value$18 $16 $17Stock award shares forfeited— — —Weighted average grant date fair value$24 $20 $18Forfeitures upon spin off (A)— — 1Weighted average grant date fair value$— $— $20Modification upon spin off (B)— — 1Unvested stock award shares at December 313 4 5Weighted average grant date fair value$24 $20 $17









(A)In connection with the spin off of TopBuild, TopBuild employees forfeited their outstanding Masco equity awards.
(B)Subsequent to the separation of TopBuild, we modified our outstanding equity awards to employees and non-employee Directors such that all individuals received an equivalent fair value both before and after the separation.
The modification to the outstanding stock awards was made pursuant to existing anti-dilution provisions in our 2014 Plan and 2005 Long Term Incentive Plan.At December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, there was $46 million, $43 million and $42 million, respectively, of total unrecognized compensation expense related to unvested stock awards; such awards had a weighted average remaining vesting period of three years at December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015.The total market value (at the vesting date) of stock award shares which vested during 2017, 2016 and 2015 was $45 million, $43 million and $54 million, respectively.Stock Options.
Stock options are granted to certain key employees.
The exercise price equals the market price of our common stock at the grant date.
These options generally become exercisable (vest ratably) over five years beginning on the first anniversary from the date of grant and expire no later than 10 years after the grant date.We granted 397,350 shares of stock options during 2017 with a grant date weighted-average exercise price of approximately $34 per share.
During 2017, no stock option shares were forfeited (including options that expired unexercised).56MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)K. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION (Continued)Our stock option activity was as follows, shares in millions: 2017 2016 2015Option shares outstanding, January 17 12 18Weighted average exercise price$15 $17 $21Option shares granted— — —Weighted average exercise price$34 $26 $26Option shares exercised2 5 5Aggregate intrinsic value on date of exercise (A)$47 million $64 million $50 millionWeighted average exercise price$15 $21 $17Option shares forfeited— — 3Weighted average exercise price$— $— $29Forfeitures upon spin off (B)— — —Weighted average exercise price$— $— $19Modifications upon spin off (C)— — 2Option shares outstanding, December 315 7 12Weighted average exercise price$16 $15 $17Weighted average remaining option term (in years)4 4 3Option shares vested and expected to vest, December 315 7 12Weighted average exercise price$16 $15 $17Aggregate intrinsic value (A)$147 million $118 million $133 millionWeighted average remaining option term (in years)4 4 3Option shares exercisable (vested), December 314 6 10Weighted average exercise price$13 $13 $18Aggregate intrinsic value (A)$123 million $102 million $113 millionWeighted average remaining option term (in years)3 3 3










 (A)Aggregate intrinsic value is calculated using our stock price at each respective date, less the exercise price (grant date price) multiplied by the number of shares.
(B)In connection with the spin off of TopBuild, TopBuild employees forfeited their outstanding Masco equity awards.
(C)Subsequent to the separation of TopBuild, we modified our outstanding equity awards to employees and non-employee Directors such that all individuals received an equivalent fair value both before and after the separation.
The modification to the outstanding options was made pursuant to existing anti-dilution provisions in our 2014 Plan and 2005 Long Term Incentive Plan.At December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, there was $7 million, $6 million and $6 million, respectively, of unrecognized compensation expense (using the Black-Scholes option pricing model at the grant date) related to unvested stock options; such options had a weighted average remaining vesting period of three years at December 31, 2017 and 2016 and two years at December 31, 2015.57MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)K. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION (Continued)The weighted average grant date fair value of option shares granted and the assumptions used to estimate those values using a Black-Scholes option pricing model were as follows: 2017 2016 2015Weighted average grant date fair value$9.68 $6.43 $9.67Risk-free interest rate2.16% 1.41% 1.75%Dividend yield1.19% 1.49% 1.32%Volatility factor30.00% 29.00% 42.00%Expected option life6 years 6 years 6 yearsThe following table summarizes information for stock option shares outstanding and exercisable at December 31, 2017, shares in millions: Option Shares Outstanding Option Shares Exercisable Range ofPrices Number ofShares WeightedAverageRemainingOption Term WeightedAverageExercisePrice Number ofShares WeightedAverageExercisePrice$7 - 18 3 3 Years $12 4 $12$20 - 23 1 7 Years $22 — $22$26 - 34 1 9 Years $29 — $26$7 - 34 5 4 Years $16 4 $13Restricted Stock Units.
In March 2017, our Organization and Compensation Committee ("Compensation Committee") of the Board of Directors approved a Long Term Incentive Program ("LTIP Program"), replacing our previous Long Term Cash Incentive Plan.
Under the LTIP Program, we granted restricted stock units to certain senior executives.
These restricted stock units will vest and share awards will be issued at no cost to the recipients, subject to our achievement of specified return on invested capital performance goals over a three-year period that have been established by the Compensation Committee for the performance period and the recipient's continued employment through the share award date.
Restricted stock units are granted at a target number; based on our performance, the number of restricted stock units that vest can be adjusted downward to zero and upward to a maximum of 200%.
We granted 124,780 restricted stock units during 2017, with a grant date fair value of approximately $34 per share.
No restricted stock units were forfeited during 2017.
Phantom Stock Awards and Stock Appreciation Rights ("SARs").
We grant phantom stock awards and SARs to certain non-U.S. employees.Phantom stock awards are linked to the value of our common stock on the date of grant and are settled in cash upon vesting, typically over 5 to 10 years.
We account for phantom stock awards as liability-based awards; the compensation expense is initially measured as the market price of our common stock at the grant date and is recognized over the vesting period.
The liability is remeasured and adjusted at the end of each reporting period until the awards are fully-vested and paid to the employees.
We recognized expense of $6 million, $2 million and $5 million related to phantom stock awards in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
In 2017, 2016 and 2015, we granted 104,580 shares, 140,710 shares and 134,560 shares, respectively, of phantom stock awards with an aggregate fair value of $4 million each year, and paid cash of $5 million in both 2017 and 2016 and $6 million in 2015 to settle phantom stock awards.SARs are linked to the value of our common stock on the date of grant and are settled in cash upon exercise.
We account for SARs using the fair value method, which requires outstanding SARs to be classified as liability-based awards and valued using a Black-Scholes option pricing model at the grant date; such fair value is recognized as compensation expense over the vesting period, typically five years.
The liability is remeasured and adjusted at the end of each reporting period until the SARs are exercised and payment is made to the employees or the SARs expire.
We recognized expense of $3 million, $2 million and $6 million related to SARs in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
During 2017, 2016 and 2015, we did not grant any SARs.58MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)K. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION (Concluded)Information related to phantom stock awards and SARs was as follows, in millions: Phantom Stock Awards Stock Appreciation Rights At December 31, At December 31, 2017 2016 2017 2016Accrued compensation cost liability$12 $10 $7 $8Unrecognized compensation cost$4 $4 $— $—Equivalent common shares— — — 1L.
EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANSWe sponsor qualified defined-benefit and defined-contribution retirement plans for most of our employees.
In addition to our qualified defined-benefit pension plans, we have unfunded non-qualified defined-benefit pension plans covering certain employees, which provide for benefits in addition to those provided by the qualified pension plans.
Substantially all salaried employees participate in non-contributory defined-contribution retirement plans, to which payments are determined annually by the Compensation Committee.Pre-tax expense related to our retirement plans was as follows, in millions: 2017 2016 2015Defined-contribution plans$55 $58 $52Defined-benefit pension plans29 34 32 $84 $92 $84In addition to the pre-tax expense related to our defined-benefit pension plans, we recognized $58 million of actuarial losses, net of tax, that were previously included within accumulated other comprehensive loss due to the disposition of a pension plan in connection with the divestiture of Moores, which was recorded within other income (expense), net.
As of January 1, 2010, substantially all our domestic and foreign qualified and domestic non-qualified defined-benefit pension plans were frozen to future benefit accruals.59MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)L. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANS (Continued)Changes in the projected benefit obligation and fair value of plan assets, and the funded status of our defined-benefit pension plans were as follows, in millions: 2017 2016 Qualified Non-Qualified Qualified Non-QualifiedChanges in projected benefit obligation:
 Projected benefit obligation at January 1$1,055 $170 $1,059 $174Service cost3 — 3 —Interest cost36 6 41 7Actuarial loss, net34 7 50 1Foreign currency exchange20 — (29) —Benefit payments(43) (13) (69) (12)Divestitures(144) — — —Projected benefit obligation at December 31$961 $170 $1,055 $170Changes in fair value of plan assets:
 Fair value of plan assets at January 1$717 $— $658 $—Actual return on plan assets77 — 58 —Foreign currency exchange8 — (20) —Company contributions52 13 100 12Expenses, other(7) — (10) —Benefit payments(43) (13) (69) (12)Divestitures(109) — — —Fair value of plan assets at December 31$695 $— $717 $—Funded status at December 31$(266) $(170) $(338) $(170)Amounts in our consolidated balance sheets were as follows, in millions: At December 31, 2017 At December 31, 2016 Qualified Non-Qualified Qualified Non-QualifiedOther assets$1 $— $2 $—Accrued liabilities(1) (13) (1) (12)Other liabilities(266) (157) (339) (158)Total net liability$(266) $(170) $(338) $(170)Unrealized loss included in accumulated other comprehensive loss before income taxes was as follows, in millions: At December 31, 2017 At December 31, 2016 Qualified Non-Qualified Qualified Non-QualifiedNet loss$442 $59 $519 $54Net transition obligation— — 1 —Net prior service cost3 — 3 —Total$445 $59 $523 $5460MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)L. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANS (Continued)Information for defined-benefit pension plans with an accumulated benefit obligation in excess of plan assets was as follows, in millions: At December 31 2017 2016 Qualified Non-Qualified Qualified Non-QualifiedProjected benefit obligation$945 $170 $1,044 $170Accumulated benefit obligation$945 $170 $1,044 $170Fair value of plan assets$679 $— $704 $—The projected benefit obligation was in excess of plan assets for all of our qualified defined-benefit pension plans at December 31, 2017 and 2016 which had an accumulated benefit obligation in excess of plan assets.Net periodic pension cost for our defined-benefit pension plans was as follows, in millions: 2017 2016 2015 Qualified Non-Qualified Qualified Non-Qualified Qualified Non-QualifiedService cost$3 $— $3 $— $3 $—Interest cost44 6 49 7 47 7Expected return on plan assets(46) — (44) — (46) —Recognized net loss19 3 17 2 18 3Net periodic pension cost$20 $9 $25 $9 $22 $10We expect to recognize $20 million of pre-tax net loss from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net periodic pension cost in 2018 related to our defined-benefit pension plans.
For plans in which almost all of the plan's participants are inactive, pre-tax net loss within accumulated other comprehensive loss is amortized using the straight-line method over the remaining life expectancy of the inactive plan participants.
For plans which do not have almost all inactive participants, pre-tax net loss within accumulated other comprehensive loss is amortized using the straight-line method over the average remaining service period of the active employees expected to receive benefits from the plan.Plan Assets.
Our qualified defined-benefit pension plan weighted average asset allocation, which is based upon fair value, was as follows: 2017 2016Equity securities55% 49%Debt securities28% 32%Other17% 19%Total100% 100%For our qualified defined-benefit pension plans, we have adopted accounting guidance that defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and prescribes disclosures about fair value measurements.
Accounting guidance defines fair value as "the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
"61MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)L. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANS (Continued)Following is a description of the valuation methodologies used for assets measured at fair value.
There have been no changes in the methodologies used at December 31, 2017 compared to December 31, 2016.
Common and Preferred Stocks and Short-Term and Other Investments: Valued at the closing price reported on the active market on which the individual securities are traded or based on the active market for similar securities.
Certain investments are valued based on NAV, which approximates fair value.
Such basis is determined by referencing the respective fund's underlying assets.
There are no unfunded commitments or other restrictions associated with these investments.
Private Equity and Hedge Funds: Valued based on an estimated fair value using either a market approach or an income approach, both of which require a significant degree of judgment.
There is no active trading market for these investments and they are generally illiquid.
Due to the significant unobservable inputs, the fair value measurements used to estimate fair value are a Level 3 input.
Certain investments are valued based on NAV, which approximates fair value.
Such basis is determined by referencing the respective fund's underlying assets.
There are no unfunded commitments or other restrictions associated with these investments.
Corporate, Government and Other Debt Securities: Valued based on either the closing price reported on the active market on which the individual securities are traded or using pricing models maximizing the use of observable inputs for similar securities.
This includes basing value on yields currently available on comparable securities of issuers with similar credit ratings.
Certain investments are valued based on NAV, which approximates fair value.
Such basis is determined by referencing the respective fund's underlying assets.
There are unfunded commitments of $2 million and no other restrictions associated with these investments.
Common Collective Trust Fund: Valued based on an amortized cost basis, which approximates fair value.
Such basis is determined by reference to the respective fund's underlying assets, which are primarily cash equivalents.
There are no unfunded commitments or other restrictions associated with this fund.
Buy-in Annuity: Valued based on the associated benefit obligation for which the buy-in annuity covers the benefits, which approximates fair value.
Such basis is determined based on various assumptions, including the discount rate, long-term rate of return on plan assets and mortality rate.The methods described above may produce a fair value calculation that may not be indicative of net realizable value or reflective of future fair values.
Furthermore, while we believe our valuation methods are appropriate and consistent with other market participants, the use of different methodologies or assumptions to determine the fair value of certain financial instruments could result in a different fair value measurement at the reporting date.The following tables set forth, by level within the fair value hierarchy, the qualified defined-benefit pension plan assets at fair value as of December 31, 2017 and 2016, as well as those valued at NAV using the practical expedient, which approximates fair value, in millions.62MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)L. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANS (Continued) At December 31, 2017 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Valued at NAV TotalPlan Assets
 Common and Preferred Stocks:
 United States$144 $— $— $47 $191International66 — — 125 191Private Equity and Hedge Funds:
 United States— — 36 — 36International— — 24 35 59Corporate Debt Securities:
 United States31 26 — — 57International— 7 — 21 28Government and Other Debt Securities:
 United States15 7 — 31 53International31 28 — — 59Common Collective Trust Fund – United States— 6 — — 6Buy-in Annuity - International— 12 — — 12Short-Term and Other Investments:
 United States2 — — — 2International— 1 — — 1Total Plan Assets$289 $87 $60 $259 $695 At December 31, 2016 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Valued at NAV TotalPlan Assets
 Common and Preferred Stocks:
 United States$142 $— $— $118 $260International74 — — 16 90Private Equity and Hedge Funds:
 United States— — 37 — 37International— — 24 32 56Corporate Debt Securities:
 United States27 28 — 2 57International— 26 — 17 43Government and Other Debt Securities:
 United States46 4 — — 50International27 53 — — 80Common Collective Trust Fund – United States— 4 — — 4Short-Term and Other Investments:
 United States2 — — — 2International5 15 18 — 38Total Plan Assets$323 $130 $79 $185 $71763MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)L. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANS (Continued)Changes in the fair value of the qualified defined-benefit pension plan Level 3 assets, were as follows, in millions: 2017 2016Fair Value, January 1$79 $88Purchases6 6Sales(31) (19)Unrealized gains6 4Fair Value, December 31$60 $79Assumptions.
Weighted average major assumptions used in accounting for our defined-benefit pension plans were as follows: 2017 2016 2015Discount rate for obligations3.30% 3.50% 4.00%Expected return on plan assets7.25% 7.25% 7.25%Rate of compensation increase—% —% —%Discount rate for net periodic pension cost3.50% 4.00% 3.80%The discount rate for obligations for 2017, 2016 and 2015 was based upon the expected duration of each defined-benefit pension plan's liabilities matched to the December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 Willis Towers Watson Rate Link Curve.
At December 31, 2017, such rates for our defined-benefit pension plans ranged from 1.5 percent to 3.6 percent, with the most significant portion of the liabilities having a discount rate for obligations of 3.4 percent or higher.
At December 31, 2016, such rates for our defined-benefit pension plans ranged from 1.5 percent to 4.0 percent, with the most significant portion of the liabilities having a discount rate for obligations of 3.8 percent or higher.
At December 31, 2015, such rates for our defined‑benefit pension plans ranged from 2.0 percent to 4.3 percent, with the most significant portion of the liabilities having a discount rate for obligations of 4.0 percent or higher.
The decreases in the weighted average discount rates from 2015 to 2016, and from 2016 to 2017, are principally the result of lower long-term interest rates in the bond markets.
For 2017, 2016 and 2015, we determined the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 7.25 percent based upon an analysis of expected and historical rates of return of various asset classes utilizing the current and long-term target asset allocation of the plan assets.
The projected asset return at December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 also considered near term returns, including current market conditions as well as that pension assets are long-term in nature.
The actual annual rate of return on our pension plan assets was positive 13.9 percent, positive 8.3 percent and negative 1.8 percent in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
For the 10-year period ended December 31, 2017, the actual annual rate of return on our pension plan assets was 4.3 percent.
Although this rate of return is less than our current expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, we note that the 10-year period ended December 31, 2017 includes one significant decline in the equity markets in 2008 (of negative 32.1 percent).
Accordingly, and based on our target allocation, we believe a 7.25 percent expected long-term rate of return is reasonable.The investment objectives seek to minimize the volatility of the value of our plan assets relative to pension liabilities and to ensure plan assets are sufficient to pay plan benefits.
In 2017, we substantially achieved targeted asset allocation: 50 percent equities, 30 percent fixed-income, and 20 percent alternative investments (such as private equity, commodities and hedge funds).The asset allocation of the investment portfolio was developed with the objective of achieving our expected rate of return and reducing volatility of asset returns, and considered the freezing of future benefits.
The equity portfolios are invested in individual securities or funds that are expected to mirror broad market returns for equity securities.
The fixed-income portfolio is invested in corporate bonds, bond index funds and U.S. Treasury securities.
It is expected that the alternative investments would have a higher rate of return than the targeted overall long-term return of 7.25 percent.
However, these investments are subject to greater volatility, due to their nature, than a portfolio of equities and fixed-income investments, and would be less liquid than financial instruments that trade on public markets.
This portfolio is expected to yield a long-term rate of return of 7.25 percent.64MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)L. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLANS (Concluded)The fair value of our plan assets is subject to risk including significant concentrations of risk in our plan assets related to equity, interest rate and operating risk.
In order to ensure plan assets are sufficient to pay benefits, a portion of plan assets is allocated to equity investments that are expected, over time, to earn higher returns with more volatility than fixed-income investments which more closely match pension liabilities.
Within equity, risk is mitigated by targeting a portfolio that is broadly diversified by geography, market capitalization, manager mandate size, investment style and process.In order to minimize asset volatility relative to the liabilities, a portion of plan assets are allocated to fixed-income investments that are exposed to interest rate risk.
Rate increases generally will result in a decline in fixed-income assets, while reducing the present value of the liabilities.
Conversely, rate decreases will increase fixed income assets, partially offsetting the related increase in the liabilities.Potential events or circumstances that could have a negative effect on estimated fair value include the risks of inadequate diversification and other operating risks.
To mitigate these risks, investments are diversified across and within asset classes in support of investment objectives.
Policies and practices to address operating risks include ongoing manager oversight, plan and asset class investment guidelines and instructions that are communicated to managers, and periodic compliance and audit reviews to ensure adherence to these policies.
In addition, we periodically seek the input of our independent advisor to ensure the investment policy is appropriate.Other.
We sponsor certain post-retirement benefit plans that provide medical, dental and life insurance coverage for eligible retirees and dependents based upon age and length of service.
Substantially all of these plans were frozen as of January 1, 2010.
The aggregate present value of the unfunded accumulated post-retirement benefit obligation was $10 million and $9 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.Cash Flows.
At December 31, 2017, we expect to contribute approximately $45 million to our domestic qualified defined-benefit pension plans in 2018, which will exceed ERISA requirements.
We also expect to contribute approximately $3 million and $13 million to our foreign and non-qualified (domestic) defined-benefit pension plans, respectively, in 2018.At December 31, 2017, the benefits expected to be paid in each of the next five years, and in aggregate for the five years thereafter, relating to our defined-benefit pension plans, were as follows, in millions: QualifiedPlans Non-QualifiedPlans2018$47 $132019$48 $122020$49 $122021$50 $122022$50 $132023 - 2027$262 $56M.
SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITYIn May 2017, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase, for retirement, of up to $1.5 billion of shares of our common stock in open-market transactions or otherwise, replacing the previous Board of Directors' authorization established in 2014.
During 2017, we repurchased and retired 9.2 million shares of our common stock (including 0.9 million shares to offset the dilutive impact of long-term stock awards granted in 2017), for cash aggregating $331 million.
At December 31, 2017, we had $1.3 billion remaining under the 2017 authorization.
During 2016, we repurchased and retired 14.9 million shares of our common stock for cash aggregating $459 million (including 1.1 million shares to offset the dilutive impact of long-term stock awards granted in 2016).
During 2015, we repurchased and retired 17.2 million shares of our common stock for cash aggregating $456 million (including 0.7 million shares to offset the dilutive impact of long-term stock awards granted in 2015).On June 30, 2015, we completed the spin off of Top Build as an independent publicly traded company.
As a result of the separation, our retained earnings decreased by $828 million in 2015.65MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)M. SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY (Concluded)On the basis of amounts paid (declared), cash dividends per common share were $0.405 ($0.410) in 2017, $0.385 ($0.390) in 2016 and $0.365 ($0.370) in 2015Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss.
The components of accumulated other comprehensive loss attributable to Masco Corporation were as follows, in millions: At December 31 2017 2016Cumulative translation adjustments, net$282 $177Unrealized loss on interest rate swaps, net(12) (15)Unrecognized net loss and prior service cost, net(335) (397)Accumulated other comprehensive loss$(65) $(235)The cumulative translation adjustment, net, is reported net of income tax benefit of $2 million at December 31, 2016.
The unrealized loss on interest rate swaps, net, is reported net of income tax expense of $4 million and $2 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
The unrecognized net loss and prior service cost, net, is reported net of income tax benefit of $154 million and $164 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.N.
RECLASSIFICATIONS FROM OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)The reclassifications from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) to the consolidated statements of operations were as follows, in millions:Accumulated OtherComprehensive Income (Loss) 2017 2016 2015 Statement of Operations Line ItemAmortization of defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefits:
 Actuarial losses, net $86 $19 $21 Other income (expense), net and selling, general and administrative expensesTax (benefit) (13) (7) (8) Net of tax (A) $73 $12 $13

 Interest rate swaps $4 $2 $2 Interest expenseTax (benefit) (1) (1) — Net of tax $3 $1 $2

 Available-for-sale securities $— $(3) $— Other, netTax expense (B) — 15 — Net of tax $— $12 $—







 (A) The 2017 amortization of defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefits includes $58 million, net of tax, due to the disposition of a pension plan in connection with the divestiture of Moores and was recorded within other income (expense), net.
Other costs were primarily recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses.
(B) The tax expense related to the available-for-sale securities in 2016 includes $14 million related to the disproportionate tax effect that we recognized as a result of the redemption of all of our auction rate securities.
Refer to Note Q to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
66MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)O.
SEGMENT INFORMATIONOur reportable segments are as follows:Plumbing Products – principally includes faucets, plumbing fittings and valves, showerheads and hand showers, bathtubs and shower enclosures, toilets, spas, exercise pools and water handling systems.Decorative Architectural Products – principally includes paints and other coating products, cabinet door, window and other hardware and glass shower doors.Cabinetry Products – principally includes assembled kitchen and bath cabinets, home office workstations, entertainment centers and storage products.Windows and Other Specialty Products – principally includes windows, window frame components, patio doors, and, until the divestiture of Arrow, staple gun tackers, staples and other fastening tools.The above products are sold to the residential repair and remodel and new home construction markets through home center retailers, online retailers, mass merchandisers, hardware stores, homebuilders, distributors and other outlets for consumers and contractors and direct to the customer.Our operations are principally located in North America and Europe.
Our country of domicile is the United States of America.Corporate assets consist primarily of real property, equipment, cash and cash investments and other investments.Our segments are based upon similarities in products and represent the aggregation of operating units, for which financial information is regularly evaluated by our corporate operating executive in determining resource allocation and assessing performance, and is periodically reviewed by the Board of Directors.
Accounting policies for the segments are the same as those for us.
We primarily evaluate performance based upon operating profit (loss) and, other than general corporate expense, allocate specific corporate overhead to each segment.Information by segment and geographic area was as follows, in millions: Net Sales(1)(2)(3)(4)(5) Operating Profit(Loss) (5)(6) Assets atDecember 31 (7) 2017 2016 2015 2017 2016 2015 2017 2016 2015Our operations by segment were:


 Plumbing Products$3,735 $3,526 $3,341 $698 $642 $512 $2,260 $2,009 $1,972Decorative Architectural Products2,205 2,092 2,020 434 430 403 961 894 874Cabinetry Products934 970 1,025 90 93 51 524 537 567Windows and Other Specialty Products770 769 756 52 (3) 57 673 743 748Total$7,644 $7,357 $7,142 $1,274 $1,162 $1,023 $4,418 $4,183 $4,161Our operations by geographic area were:


 North America$6,069 $5,834 $5,645 $1,072 $961 $841 $3,211 $3,001 $2,925International, principally Europe1,575 1,523 1,497 202 201 182 1,207 1,182 1,236Total, as above$7,644 $7,357 $7,142 1,274 1,162 1,023 4,418 4,183 4,161General corporate expense, net (6)
(105) (109) (109)
Operating profit, as reported
1,169 1,053 914
Other income (expense), net
(284) (223) (225)
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
$885 $830 $689
Corporate assets

1,070 954 1,503Total assets

$5,488 $5,137 $5,66467MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)O.
SEGMENT INFORMATION (Concluded) Property Additions (5) Depreciation andAmortization (5) 2017 2016 2015 2017 2016 2015Our operations by segment were:

 Plumbing Products$115 $110 $87 $63 $57 $56Decorative Architectural Products19 22 16 16 16 16Cabinetry Products14 8 6 14 21 24Windows and Other Specialty Products13 30 41 21 21 18 161 170 150 114 115 114Unallocated amounts, principally related to corporate assets12 10 1 13 19 13Total$173 $180 $151 $127 $134 $127 (1)Included in net sales were export sales from the U.S. of $232 million, $226 million and $217 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
(2)Excluded from net sales were intra-company sales between segments of less than one percent in 2017, 2016 and 2015.
(3)Included in net sales were sales to one customer of $2,535 million, $2,480 million and $2,378 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Such net sales were included in each of our segments.
(4)Net sales from our operations in the U.S. were $5,821 million, $5,605 million and $5,407 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
(5)Net sales, operating profit (loss), property additions and depreciation and amortization expense for 2015 excluded the results of businesses reported as discontinued operations.
(6)General corporate expense, net included those expenses not specifically attributable to our segments.
(7)Long-lived assets of our operations in the U.S. and Europe were $1,582 million and $482 million, $1,508 million and $417 million, and $1,487 million and $427 million at December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.P.
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE), NETOther, net, which is included in other income (expense), net, was as follows, in millions: 2017 2016 2015Loss on sales of businesses, net (A)$(13) $— $—Income from cash and cash investments and short-term bank deposits4 4 3Equity investment income, net1 2 2Realized gain from auction rate securities— 3 —Realized gains from private equity funds3 5 6Impairment of private equity funds(2) — —Foreign currency transaction losses— (3) (14)Other items, net1 (5) 3Total other, net$(6) $6 $—









 (A) Included in loss on sales of businesses, net is a loss of $64 million related to the divestiture of Moores and a gain of $51 million related to the divestiture of Arrow.68MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)Q.
INCOME TAXES
 (In Millions) 2017 2016 2015Income from continuing operations before income taxes:
 U.S. $731 $614 $496Foreign154 216 193 $885 $830 $689Income tax expense on income from continuing operations:
 Currently payable:
 U.S. Federal$196 $73 $10State and local31 24 27Foreign68 69 56Deferred:
 U.S. Federal10 140 192State and local(1) 2 3Foreign1 (12) 5 $305 $296 $293Deferred tax assets at December 31:
 Receivables$8 $10 Inventories13 17 Other assets, including stock-based compensation36 58 Accrued liabilities45 53 Long-term liabilities169 280 Net operating loss carryforward53 51 Capital loss carryforward1 — Tax credit carryforward8 9 333 478 Valuation allowance(47) (45) 286 433 Deferred tax liabilities at December 31:
 Property and equipment98 127 Intangibles139 222 Investment in foreign subsidiaries7 15 Other20 21 264 385 Net deferred tax asset at December 31$22 $48 The net deferred tax asset consisted of net deferred tax assets (included in other assets) of $48 million and $68 million, and net deferred tax liabilities (included in other liabilities) of $26 million and $20 million, at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.The current portion of the state and local income tax includes a $5 million, $8 million and $5 million tax benefit from the reversal of an accrual for uncertain tax positions resulting primarily from the expiration of applicable statutes of limitations and favorable settlements on state audits in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
The deferred portion of the state and local taxes includes a $(1) million, $5 million and $(1) million tax (benefit) expense resulting from a change in the valuation allowance against state and local deferred tax assets in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
The deferred portion of the foreign taxes includes $6 million and $12 million tax expense from a change in the valuation allowance against foreign deferred tax assets in 2016 and 2015, respectively.69MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)Q.
INCOME TAXES (Continued)Due to the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“Tax Act”) on December 22, 2017, we recorded a $20 million tax benefit from the elimination of a deferred tax liability previously recorded on undistributed foreign earnings as a result of the change from a worldwide to a territorial system of taxation.
This tax benefit was offset by a $3 million tax charge resulting from the re-measurement of our remaining net deferred tax assets due to a reduction in the U.S. Federal corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent.
In addition, the Tax Act requires a mandatory deemed repatriation of undistributed foreign earnings resulting in a toll charge of 15.5 percent on earnings related to cash and liquid assets and 8 percent on earnings for non-liquid assets.
Due to the ability to offset positive foreign earnings with existing foreign deficits, we do not anticipate paying any toll charge related to our undistributed foreign earnings.
The $64 million loss from the divestiture of Moores that was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017 provided no tax benefit.The accounting guidance for income taxes requires us to allocate our provision for income taxes between continuing operations and other categories of earnings, such as other comprehensive income (loss).
Subsequent adjustments to deferred taxes originally recorded to other comprehensive income (loss) may reverse in a different category of earnings, such as continuing operations resulting in a disproportionate tax effect within accumulated other comprehensive loss.We created a $14 million disproportionate tax effect in prior years as the result of allocating a deferred tax charge to other comprehensive income (loss) on the unrealized gain of certain available-for-sale securities that was later reversed through continuing operations by a valuation allowance adjustment, followed by the disposition of the securities while in a full valuation allowance position.
Such disproportionate tax effect has remained in accumulated other comprehensive loss until such time as we cease to have an available-for-sale securities portfolio.
In the fourth quarter of 2016 as a result of our final auction rate securities being called by our counterparty and redeemed, the disproportionate tax effect was eliminated by recording a $14 million charge to income tax expense included in continuing operations that was offset by a corresponding tax benefit included in other comprehensive income (loss).In the fourth quarter of 2016, we recorded a $13 million tax benefit from the recognition of a deferred tax asset on certain German net operating losses primarily resulting from a return to sustainable profitability.During 2015 we recorded a $21 million valuation allowance against certain deferred tax assets related to TopBuild as a non-cash charge to income tax expense.
The TopBuild deferred tax assets have been impaired by our decision to spin off TopBuild into a separate company that on a stand-alone basis as of June 30, 2015, the spin off date, was unlikely to be able to realize the value of such deferred tax assets as a result of its history of losses.Our capital allocation strategy includes reinvesting in our business, balancing share repurchases with potential acquisitions and maintaining an appropriate dividend.
In order to provide greater flexibility in the execution of our capital allocation strategy, we determined in the fourth quarter of 2015 that we may repatriate earnings from certain foreign subsidiaries that were previously considered permanently reinvested.
As a result, we recorded a $19 million charge to income tax expense in 2015 to recognize the required taxes on foreign earnings, including those previously considered permanently reinvested.
Our December 31, 2016, deferred tax balance on investments in foreign subsidiaries reflects the impact of all taxable temporary differences, including those related to substantially all undistributed foreign earnings, except those that are legally restricted.
As a result of the enactment of the Tax Act, no deferred tax is required at December 31, 2017 on our foreign taxable temporary differences, other than foreign withholding taxes.
During 2015, the tax benefit from certain stock-based compensation was not recognized as a deferred tax asset until the tax deduction reduces cash taxes.
We recorded deferred tax assets of $53 million to paid-in capital in 2015 related to additional net operating losses, previously not recognized, that were used to reduce cash taxes on our 2015 taxable income.We continue to maintain a valuation allowance on certain state and foreign deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2017.
Should we determine that we would not be able to realize our remaining deferred tax assets in these jurisdictions in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be recorded in the period such determination is made.70MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)Q.
INCOME TAXES (Continued)Of the $61 million and $60 million deferred tax asset related to the net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively, $33 million and $35 million will expire between 2021 and 2036 and $28 million and $25 million are unlimited, respectively.A reconciliation of the U.S. Federal statutory tax rate to the income tax expense on income from continuing operations was as follows: 2017 2016 2015U.S.
Federal statutory tax rate35 % 35 % 35 %State and local taxes, net of U.S. Federal tax benefit2 2 3Lower taxes on foreign earnings(1) (2) (1)U.S. and foreign taxes on distributed and undistributed foreign earnings1 1 3Domestic production deduction(2) (1) —Stock-based compensation(2) — —Business divestitures with no tax impact4 — —Change in U.S. Federal tax law(2) — —U.S.
Federal valuation allowance— — 3Other, net(1) 1 —Effective tax rate34 % 36 % 43 %Income taxes paid were $258 million, $190 million and $107 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.A reconciliation of the beginning and ending liability for uncertain tax positions, including related interest and penalties, is as follows, in millions: UncertainTax Positions Interest andPenalties TotalBalance at January 1, 2016$43 $10 $53Current year tax positions:
 Additions11 — 11Reductions(1) — (1)Prior year tax positions:
 Additions1 — 1Reductions(2) — (2)Lapse of applicable statute of limitations(6) — (6)Interest and penalties recognized in income tax expense— (1) (1)Balance at December 31, 2016$46 $9 $55Current year tax positions:
 Additions13 — 13Reductions— — —Prior year tax positions:
 Additions3 — 3Reductions(1) — (1)Lapse of applicable statute of limitations(7) — (7)Interest and penalties recognized in income tax expense— (1) (1)Balance at December 31, 2017$54 $8 $6271MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)Q.
INCOME TAXES (Concluded)If recognized, $43 million and $30 million of the liability for uncertain tax positions at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively, net of any U.S. Federal tax benefit, would impact our effective tax rate.Of the $62 million and $55 million total liability for uncertain tax positions (including related interest and penalties) at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively, $59 million and $54 million are recorded in other liabilities, respectively, and $3 million and $1 million is recorded as a net offset to other assets at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.We file income tax returns in the U.S. Federal jurisdiction, and various local, state and foreign jurisdictions.
We continue to participate in the Compliance Assurance Process ("CAP").
CAP is a real-time audit of the U.S. Federal income tax return that allows the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS"), working in conjunction with us, to determine tax return compliance with the U.S. Federal tax law prior to filing the return.
This program provides us with greater certainty about our tax liability for a given year within months, rather than years, of filing our annual tax return and greatly reduces the need for recording a liability for U.S. Federal uncertain tax positions.
The IRS has completed their examination of our consolidated U.S. Federal tax returns through 2016.
With few exceptions, we are no longer subject to state or foreign income tax examinations on filed returns for years before 2006.As a result of tax audit closings, settlements and the expiration of applicable statutes of limitations in various jurisdictions within the next 12 months, we anticipate that it is reasonably possible the liability for uncertain tax positions could be reduced by approximately $8 million.R.
EARNINGS PER COMMON SHAREReconciliations of the numerators and denominators used in the computations of basic and diluted earnings per common share were as follows, in millions: 2017 2016 2015Numerator (basic and diluted):
 Income from continuing operations$533 $491 $357Less: Allocation to unvested restricted stock awards5 6 5Income from continuing operations attributable to common shareholders

528 485 352Loss from discontinued operations, net— — (2)Less: Allocation to unvested restricted stock awards— — —Loss from discontinued operations attributable to common shareholders— — (2)Net income available to common shareholders$528 $485 $350
Denominator:
 Basic common shares (based upon weighted average)314 326 338Add: Stock option dilution4 4 3Diluted common shares318 330 341We follow accounting guidance regarding determining whether instruments granted in share-based payment transactions are participating securities.
This accounting guidance clarifies that share-based payment awards that entitle their holders to receive non-forfeitable dividends prior to vesting should be considered participating securities.
We have granted restricted stock awards that contain non-forfeitable rights to dividends on unvested shares; such unvested restricted stock awards are considered participating securities.
As participating securities, the unvested shares are required to be included in the calculation of our basic earnings per common share, using the "two-class method."
The two-class method of computing earnings per common share is an allocation method that calculates earnings per share for each class of common stock and participating security according to dividends declared and participation rights in undistributed earnings.
For the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, we allocated dividends and undistributed earnings to the participating securities.72MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)R. EARNINGS PER COMMON SHARE (Concluded)Additionally, 354,000, 338,000 and 5 million common shares for 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively, related to stock options were excluded from the computation of diluted earnings per common share due to their antidilutive effect.Common shares outstanding included on our balance sheet and for the calculation of earnings per common share do not include unvested stock awards (3 million common shares and 4 million common shares at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively); shares outstanding for legal requirements included all common shares that have voting rights (including unvested stock awards).S.
OTHER COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIESLitigation.
We are are involved in claims and litigation, including class actions and regulatory proceedings, which arise in the ordinary course of our business.
The types of matters may include, among others: competition, product liability, employment, warranty, advertising, contract, personal injury, environmental, intellectual property, and insurance coverage.
We believe we have adequate defenses in these matters and that the likelihood that the outcome of these matters would have a material adverse effect on us is remote.
However, there is no assurance that we will prevail in these matters, and we could, in the future, incur judgments, enter into settlements of claims or revise our expectations regarding the outcome of these matters, which could materially impact our results of operations.Warranty.
Changes in our warranty liability were as follows, in millions: 2017 2016Balance at January 1$192 $152Accruals for warranties issued during the year63 66Accruals related to pre-existing warranties9 33Settlements made (in cash or kind) during the year(59) (56)Other, net (including currency translation)— (3)Balance at December 31$205 $192During 2016, a business in the Windows and Other Specialty Products segment recorded $31 million for increases in its estimate of expected future warranty claims relating to previously sold windows and doors.
The change in estimate resulted from the adoption of an improved warranty valuation model and the availability of additional information used to support the estimate of costs to service claims and recent warranty claims trends, including a shift to increased cost to repair.
Investments.
With respect to our investments in private equity funds, we had, at December 31, 2017, commitments to contribute up to $5 million of additional capital to such funds representing our aggregate capital commitment to such funds less capital contributions made to date.
We are contractually obligated to make additional capital contributions to certain of our private equity funds upon receipt of a capital call from the private equity fund.
We have no control over when or if the capital calls will occur.
Capital calls are funded in cash and generally result in an increase in the carrying value of our investment in the private equity fund when paid.Other Matters.
We enter into contracts, which include reasonable and customary indemnifications that are standard for the industries in which we operate.
Such indemnifications include claims made against builders by homeowners for issues relating to our products and workmanship.
In conjunction with divestitures and other transactions, we occasionally provide reasonable and customary indemnifications.
We have never had to pay a material amount related to these indemnifications, and we evaluate the probability that amounts may be incurred and record an estimated liability when it is probable and reasonably estimable.73MASCO CORPORATIONNOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONCLUDED)T. INTERIM FINANCIAL INFORMATION (UNAUDITED)Our quarterly results attributable to Masco Corporation were as follows: Quarters Ended (In Millions, Except Per Common Share Data) TotalYear December 31 September 30 June 30 March 312017
 Net sales$7,644 $1,874 $1,936 $2,057 $1,777Gross profit$2,611 $616 $650 $737 $608Net income$533 $87 $148 $158 $140Earnings per common share:
 Basic:
 Net income$1.68 $0.28 $0.47 $0.50 $0.44Diluted:
 Net income$1.66 $0.27 $0.46 $0.49 $0.432016
 Net sales$7,357 $1,759 $1,877 $2,001 $1,720Gross profit$2,456 $573 $614 $700 $569Net income$491 $98 $134 $150 $109Earnings per common share:
 Basic:
 Net income$1.49 $0.30 $0.41 $0.45 $0.33Diluted:
 Net income$1.47 $0.30 $0.40 $0.45 $0.32Earnings per common share amounts for the four quarters of December 31, 2017 and 2016 may not total to the earnings per common share amounts for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016 due to the allocation of income to participating securities.74Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.Not applicable.Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures.a.Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures.The Company's Principal Executive Officer and Principal Financial Officer have concluded, based on an evaluation of the Company's disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 Rules 13a-15(e) or 15d-15(e)) as required by paragraph (b) of Exchange Act Rules 13a-15 or 15d-15 that, as of December 31, 2017, the Company's disclosure controls and procedures were effective.b.Management's Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.Management's report on the Company's internal control over financial reporting (as such term is defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act) is included in this Report under
