Item 7.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of OperationsThe following discussion and analysis presents the factors that had a material effect on our results of operations during the three years ended December 31, 2016.
Also discussed is our financial position as of December 31, 2016.
You should read this discussion in conjunction with the historical consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.OverviewWe are the global leader in patient-focused medical innovations for structural heart disease and critical care monitoring.
Driven by a passion to help patients, we partner with the world's leading clinicians and researchers and aggressively invest in research and development to transform care for structural heart disease and critically ill patients.
We conduct operations worldwide and are managed in the following geographical regions: United States, Europe, Japan, and Rest of World.
Our products are categorized into the following main areas: Transcatheter Heart Valve Therapy ("THVT"), Surgical Heart Valve Therapy ("SHVT"), and Critical Care.21Table of ContentsFinancial HighlightsOur sales growth was led by our THVT products, which benefited from the launches of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 transcatheter heart valve in the United States (July 2015), Europe (January 2014), and Japan (March 2016).
Our gross profit margin in 2016 was negatively impacted relative to 2015 by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, partially offset by an improved product mix, led by THVT products.
Our gross profit margin in 2015 benefited from foreign exchange rate fluctuations and an improved product mix, led by THVT products.
Our net income in 2016 increased compared to 2015 primarily due to increased sales, partially offset by an in-process research and development ("IPR&D") charge for technology we acquired for use in our transcatheter heart valve programs.
Net income in 2014 benefited from the receipt of $750.0 million ($487.9 million, net of tax) for an upfront payment due under a litigation settlement agreement.Healthcare Environment, Opportunities, and ChallengesThe medical technology industry is highly competitive and continues to evolve.
Our success is measured both by the development of innovative products and the value we bring to our stakeholders.
We are committed to developing new technologies and providing innovative patient care, and we are committed to defending our intellectual property in support of those developments.
In 2016, we invested 15.0% of our net sales in research and development.
The following is a summary of important developments during 2016:•we received FDA approval for an expanded indication study of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 valve.
The investigational device exemption study will enroll elderly patients with severe, symptomatic aortic stenosis who have been determined by a heart team to be at low risk for mortality if they were to undergo surgical aortic valve replacement;•we received FDA approval to expand use of the Edwards SAPIEN XT transcatheter heart valve for pulmonic valve replacement procedures.
The approval enables the treatment of adult and pediatric patients who suffer from either a narrowed pulmonary valve or moderate or greater pulmonary regurgitation caused by congenital heart disease;•we received approval in Japan of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 valve for the treatment of patients suffering from severe, symptomatic aortic stenosis;•we received FDA approval of our advanced EDWARDS INTUITY Elite Valve System, a rapid deployment device for surgical aortic valve replacement, and CE Mark for our INSPIRIS RESILIA aortic valve, the first in a new class of resilient heart valves, designed for potential future valve-in-valve procedures;•we received FDA approval and CE Mark to expand use of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 valve for the treatment of patients suffering from severe, symptomatic aortic stenosis who have been determined by a heart team to be at intermediate risk for open-heart surgery;22Table of Contents•we received CE Mark for our Acumen Hypotension Probability Indicator ("HPI"), a technology that alerts clinicians to potential hypotension, or abnormally low blood pressure, in their surgical and critical care patients before it occurs; and•we entered into an agreement to acquire Valtech, a privately held company based in Israel and developer of the Cardioband System for transcatheter repair of the mitral and tricuspid valves.
We completed the acquisition on January 23, 2017.We are dedicated to generating robust clinical, economic, and quality of life evidence increasingly expected by patients, clinicians, and payors in the current healthcare environment, with the goal of encouraging the adoption of innovative new medical therapies that demonstrate superior outcomes.Results of OperationsNet Sales by Major Regions(dollars in millions) Years Ended December 31, Change Percent Change 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2016 2015United States$1,615.7 $1,262.9 $1,047.3 $352.8 $215.6 27.9% 20.6 %Europe749.0 717.3 744.5 31.7 (27.2) 4.4% (3.6)%Japan309.3 246.2 257.9 63.1 (11.7) 25.6% (4.6)%Rest of World289.7 267.3 273.2 22.4 (5.9) 8.4% (2.1)%International1,348.0 1,230.8 1,275.6 117.2 (44.8) 9.5% (3.5)%Total net sales$2,963.7 $2,493.7 $2,322.9 $470.0 $170.8 18.8% 7.4 %International net sales include the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
The impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations on net sales is not necessarily indicative of the impact on net income due to the corresponding effect of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations on international manufacturing and operating costs and our hedging activities.
For more information see "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
"Net Sales by Product Group(dollars in millions) Year Ended December 31, Change Percent Change 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2016 2015Transcatheter Heart Valve Therapy$1,628.5 $1,180.3 $943.6 $448.2 $236.7 38.0 % 25.1 %Surgical Heart Valve Therapy774.9 785.0 826.1 (10.1) (41.1) (1.3)% (5.0)%Critical Care560.3 528.4 553.2 31.9 (24.8) 6.0 % (4.5)%Total net sales$2,963.7 $2,493.7 $2,322.9 $470.0 $170.8 18.8 % 7.4 %23Table of ContentsTranscatheter Heart Valve Therapy2016 Compared with 2015 The increase in net sales of THVT products in the United States was due primarily to:•increased sales of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 valve, driven by its launch in July 2015; partially offset by:•lower sales of the Edwards SAPIEN XT valve as customers converted to Edwards SAPIEN 3.The increase in international net sales of THVT products was due primarily to increased sales of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 valve, driven primarily by its launch in Europe in January 2014 and in Japan in March 2016.2015 Compared with 2014 The increase in net sales of THVT products in the United States was due primarily to:•the Edwards SAPIEN 3 valve, driven by its launch in July 2015; and•the Edwards SAPIEN XT valve, driven by its launch in June 2014;partially offset by:•lower sales of the Edwards SAPIEN valve as customers converted to Edwards SAPIEN XT.The increase in international net sales of THVT products was due primarily to:•the Edwards SAPIEN 3 valve, driven primarily by its launch in Europe in January 2014; and•the Edwards SAPIEN XT valve in Japan, driven by its launch in October 2013; partially offset by:•lower sales of the Edwards SAPIEN XT valve in Europe, as customers converted to Edwards SAPIEN 3; and24Table of Contents•foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which decreased net sales by $71.2 million, due primarily to the weakening of the Euro against the United States dollar.In March 2016, we received approval from the the FDA to expand use of the Edwards SAPIEN XT transcatheter heart valve for pulmonic valve replacement procedures.
The approval enables the treatment of adult and pediatric patients who suffer from either a narrowed pulmonary valve, or moderate or greater pulmonary regurgitation caused by congenital heart disease.
Also in March 2016, we received approval for SAPIEN 3 in Japan for the treatment of patients suffering from severe, symptomatic aortic stenosis.
In August 2016, we received approval from the FDA, and in September 2016, we received CE Mark in Europe, to expand use of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 transcatheter heart valve for the treatment of patients suffering from severe, symptomatic aortic stenosis who have been determined to be at intermediate risk for open-heart surgery.
In January 2017, we received FDA approval for EARLY-TAVR, our trial that will study patients diagnosed with severe aortic stenosis who have not yet developed symptoms.
Patients will be randomized to receive either transfemoral SAPIEN 3 or clinical surveillance.
Surgical Heart Valve Therapy2016 Compared with 2015 The decrease in net sales of SHVT products was due primarily to:•lower sales of aortic tissue valves in the United States, as sales of Edwards SAPIEN 3 increased; and•lower international sales of mitral tissue valves, primarily in Europe and Rest of World, primarily due to supply constraints;partially offset by:•higher sales of aortic tissue valves in Europe, Japan, and Rest of World; and•foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which increased net sales by $2.2 million, due primarily to the strengthening of the Japanese yen against the United States dollar, partially offset by the weakening of various currencies against the United States dollar.25Table of Contents2015 Compared with 2014 The decrease in net sales of SHVT products was due primarily to:•foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which decreased net sales by $59.7 million, due primarily to the weakening of the Euro and the Japanese yen against the United States dollar;partially offset by:•higher sales of (1) surgical heart valve products, driven by pericardial aortic tissue valves, primarily in Europe, Japan, and the United States, and (2) EDWARDS INTUITY Elite valves, primarily in Europe.In August 2016, the FDA approved our advanced EDWARDS INTUITY Elite Valve System, a rapid deployment device for surgical aortic valve replacement.
In September 2016, we received CE Mark for our INSPIRIS RESILIA aortic valve, the first in a new class of resilient heart valves designed for potential future valve-in-valve procedures.Critical Care2016 Compared with 2015 The increase in net sales of Critical Care products was due primarily to:•higher sales of enhanced surgical recovery products in the United States, Europe, and Rest of World;•higher sales of core hemodynamic products, primarily in Rest of World; •higher sales of hardware in the United States; and•foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which increased net sales by $5.0 million due primarily to the strengthening of the Japanese yen against the United States dollar, partially offset by the weakening of various currencies against the United States dollar.2015 Compared with 2014 The decrease in net sales of Critical Care products was due primarily to:•foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which decreased net sales by $41.3 million due primarily to the weakening of the Euro and the Japanese yen against the United States dollar;26Table of Contentspartially offset by:•higher sales of enhanced surgical recovery products in the United States, Europe, and Rest of World.In October 2016, we received CE Mark for our HPI, a technology that alerts clinicians to potential hypotension, or abnormally low blood pressure, in their surgical and critical care patients.
HPI is enabled by the minimally invasive FloTrac IQ sensor, which also received CE Mark.Gross ProfitThe decrease in gross profit as a percentage of net sales in 2016 was driven by:•a 4.3 percentage point decrease due to the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, including the settlement of foreign currency hedging contracts; and•investments in manufacturing capacity;partially offset by:•a 1.6 percentage point increase in the United States, and a 0.5 percentage point increase in international markets, due to an improved product mix, driven by THVT products.The increase in gross profit as a percentage of net sales in 2015 was driven by:•a 1.9 percentage point increase due to the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, including the settlement of foreign currency hedging contracts; and•a 0.9 percentage point increase in the United States, and a 0.4 percentage point increase in international markets, due to an improved product mix, driven by THVT products;
partially offset by:•multiple investments in our operations, including an increase in costs to improve our manufacturing processes.27Table of ContentsSelling, General, and Administrative ("SG&A") ExpensesThe increase in SG&A expenses in 2016 resulted primarily from (1) higher sales and marketing expenses in the United States and Europe, mainly to support our THVT program, and (2) higher personnel-related costs.
These increases were partially offset by the suspension of the medical device excise tax in the United States, which was suspended for calendar years 2016 and 2017.
The decrease in SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales in 2016 was due primarily to higher sales in the United States and Japan.The decrease in SG&A expenses in 2015 resulted primarily from foreign currency, which reduced expenses by $61.1 million due primarily to the weakening of the Euro and the Japanese yen against the United States dollar.
This decrease was partially offset by (1) higher sales and marketing expenses in Europe, the United States, and Japan, mainly to support our THVT program and (2) higher personnel-related costs.
The decrease in SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales in 2015 was due primarily to higher sales in the United States, Europe, and Japan.Research and Development ("R&D") ExpensesThe increase in R&D expenses in 2016 was due primarily to mitral and aortic THVT product development efforts.
The suspension of the United States medical device excise tax during 2016 provided additional flexibility to accelerate investments in structural heart initiatives.
28Table of ContentsThe increase in R&D expenses in 2015 was due primarily to new THVT and SHVT product development efforts.
These costs were partially offset by lower spending for THVT clinical trials.Intellectual Property Litigation Expenses (Income), NetIn May 2014, we entered into an agreement with Medtronic, Inc. ("Medtronic") to settle all outstanding patent litigation between the companies, and, pursuant to the agreement, we received an upfront payment from Medtronic in the amount of $750.0 million.We incurred external legal costs related to intellectual property litigation of $32.6 million, $7.0 million, and $9.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively.
The increase in intellectual property litigation expenses in 2016 was due primarily to the first quarter resolution of an intellectual property litigation matter, and increased costs associated with ongoing litigation in the United States and Europe.
Special ChargesFor information on special charges, see Note 4 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Interest ExpenseInterest expense was $19.2 million, $17.2 million, and $17.2 million in 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively.
The increase in interest expense for 2016 as compared to 2015 resulted primarily from higher average interest rates.
Interest expense for 2015 remained flat compared to 2014 as the impact of higher average interest rates was offset by a lower average debt balance compared to 2014.
Interest IncomeInterest income was $10.8 million, $7.9 million, and $6.4 million in 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively.
The increase in interest income for 2016 resulted primarily from higher average interest rates.
The increase in interest income for 2015 resulted primarily from higher average investment balances and higher average interest rates.
Other Expense, net(in millions) Years Ended December 31, 2016 2015 2014Charitable foundation contribution$5.0 $— $—Foreign exchange losses, net0.5 4.8 2.0(Gain) loss on investments(0.2) (0.1) 4.5Promissory note impairment— — 4.0Insurance settlement gain— — (3.7)Lease contract termination costs— — 1.0Other(0.4) (0.7) (0.1)Total other expense, net$4.9 $4.0 $7.7In March 2016, we contributed $5.0 million to the Edwards Lifesciences Foundation, a related-party not-for-profit organization intended to provide philanthropic support to health- and community-focused charitable organizations.
Thecontribution was irrevocable and was recorded as an expense at the time of payment.The foreign exchange losses relate to the foreign currency fluctuations primarily in our intercompany receivable and payable balances, partially offset by the gains and losses on derivative instruments intended to hedge those exposures.The (gain) loss on investments represents our net share of gains and losses in investments accounted for under the equity method, and realized gains and losses on our available-for-sale and cost method investments.
During 2014, we recorded an other-than-temporary impairment charge of $3.5 million related to one of our cost method investments.29Table of ContentsIn December 2014, we recorded a $4.0 million impairment charge related to a promissory note receivable because it was likely that we would be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the promissory note agreement.
In March 2014, we recorded a $3.7 million insurance settlement gain related to inventory that was damaged in the fourth quarter of 2013.In September 2014, we committed to purchase our Draper, Utah facility under a purchase option provided in the lease agreement.
Under the terms of the lease agreement, we accrued $1.0 million for certain lease contract termination costs.Provision for Income TaxesOur effective income tax rates for 2016, 2015, and 2014 were impacted as follows (in millions): Years Ended December 31, 2016 2015 2014Income tax expense at U.S. federal statutory rate$258.3 $217.8 $400.4Foreign income taxed at different rates(88.6) (105.8) (67.1)State and local taxes, net of federal tax benefit9.7 3.1 19.3Tax credits, federal and state(21.3) (15.7) (13.5)Build (release) of reserve for uncertain tax positions for prior years4.6 3.3 (4.8)U.S. tax on foreign earnings, net of credits5.1 20.5 (3.1)Nondeductible stock-based compensation3.6 2.3 2.1Other(3.0) 2.0 (0.4)Income tax provision$168.4 $127.5 $332.9Uncertain Tax PositionsAs of December 31, 2016 and 2015, the gross uncertain tax positions were $245.5 million and $216.1 million, respectively.
We estimate that these liabilities would be reduced by $44.9 million and $40.6 million, respectively, from offsetting tax benefits associated with the correlative effects of potential transfer pricing adjustments, state income taxes, and timing adjustments.
The net amounts of $200.6 million and $175.5 million, respectively, if not required, would favorably affect our effective tax rate.
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of uncertain tax positions, excluding interest, penalties, and foreign exchange, is as follows (in millions): Years Ended December 31, 2016 2015 2014Uncertain gross tax positions, January 1$216.1 $192.3 $127.7Current year tax positions29.0 29.6 75.9Increase prior year tax positions2.7 2.2 0.6Decrease prior year tax positions(0.9) (7.4) (10.5)Settlements(0.3) (0.4) (1.0)Lapse of statutes of limitations(1.1) (0.2) (0.4)Uncertain gross tax positions, December 31$245.5 $216.1 $192.3We recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to uncertain tax positions in the provision for income taxes.
As of December 31, 2016, we had accrued $14.7 million (net of $10.8 million tax benefit) of interest related to uncertain tax positions, and as of December 31, 2015, we had accrued $10.7 million (net of $7.6 million tax benefit) of interest related to uncertain tax positions.
During 2016, 2015, and 2014, we recognized interest expense, net of tax benefit, of $4.0 million, $3.9 million, and $2.3 million, respectively, in “Provision for Income Taxes” on the consolidated statements of operations.30Table of Contents We strive to resolve open matters with each tax authority at the examination level and could reach agreement with a tax authority at any time.
While we have accrued for matters we believe are more likely than not to require settlement, the final outcome with a tax authority may result in a tax liability that is more or less than that reflected in the consolidated financial statements.
Furthermore, we may later decide to challenge any assessments, if made, and may exercise our right to appeal.
The uncertain tax positions are reviewed quarterly and adjusted as events occur that affect potential liabilities for additional taxes, such as lapsing of applicable statutes of limitations, proposed assessments by tax authorities, negotiations between tax authorities, identification of new issues, and issuance of new legislation, regulations, or case law.
Management believes that adequate amounts of tax and related penalty and interest have been provided in income tax expense for any adjustments that may result from our uncertain tax positions.
At December 31, 2016, all material state, local, and foreign income tax matters have been concluded for years through 2008.
The Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") has substantially completed its fieldwork for the 2009 through 2012 tax years.
However, the audits are currently in suspense pending a final determination with respect to a pending application for an Advance Pricing Agreement ("APA").
The IRS began its examination of the 2014 tax year during the fourth quarter of 2016.We have been pursuing an APA between the Switzerland and United States governments for the years 2009 through 2013 covering transfer pricing matters with the possibility of a roll-forward of the results to subsequent years.
These discussions remain ongoing as of December 31, 2016.
These transfer pricing matters are significant to our consolidated financial statements as the disputed amounts are material, and the final outcome is uncertain.
We continue to believe our positions are supportable.Additionally, during the fourth quarter of 2016, we received notification of preliminary agreement on methodology between the respective Competent Authorities for the requested APAs for 2015-2019 between the United States and Japan, Switzerland and Japan, and Singapore and Japan.
These are expected to be formalized and executed during 2017.During 2014, we filed with the IRS a request for a pre-filing agreement associated with a tax return filing position on a portion of the litigation settlement payment received from Medtronic in May 2014.
During the first quarter of 2015, the IRS accepted the pre-filing agreement into the pre-filing agreement program.
The closing agreement for this matter was finalized during the fourth quarter of 2016.
There remains a disputed issue and we expect to enter the Fast-Track Appeals process during 2017.
We made an advance payment of tax in December 2015 solely to prevent the further accrual of interest on any potential deficiency, not to signify any potential agreement to a contrary position that may be taken by the IRS.Management believes that adequate amounts of tax and related penalty and interest have been provided in income tax expense for any adjustments that may result from our uncertain tax positions.
Based upon the information currently available and numerous possible outcomes, we cannot reasonably estimate what, if any, changes in our existing uncertain tax positions may occur in the next 12 months and thus have recorded the gross uncertain tax positions as a long-term liability.
However, if the APA and/or the appeals process related to the pre-filing agreement is finalized in the next 12 months, it is reasonably possible that these events could result in a significant change in our uncertain tax positions within the next 12 months.The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2016 was higher than the rate for the year ended December 31, 2015 primarily because of fluctuations in the relative contribution of our foreign operations and United States operations to worldwide pre-tax income, offset by an increase in benefits from the federal and California research credits.
We have received tax incentives in certain non-U.S. tax jurisdictions, the primary benefit of which will expire in 2024.
The tax reductions as compared to the local statutory rates were $77.4 million ($0.32 per diluted share), $59.1 million ($0.25 per diluted share), and $68.3 million ($0.31 per diluted share) for the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively.
Our DR branch receives tax incentives, including an exemption from paying DR income taxes, under a Free Trade Zone law.
Effective November 9, 2012, DR enacted a law which, among other tax provisions, would apply a 10% withholding tax on dividends or branch remittances from a Free Trade Zone company to its shareholder(s).
The DR withholding tax provision was, however, contingent upon certain future events.
On October 5, 2016, the DR Ministry of Finance published a notification confirming that the 10% withholding tax on branch remittances would be due and payable by DR Free Trade Zone companies for dividends and remittances paid on or after October 5, 2016.
As a result, we expect this action will increase our effective tax rate in 2017; however, the amount is not expected to have a material impact on our results of operations.
31Table of ContentsLiquidity and Capital ResourcesOur sources of cash liquidity include cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, amounts available under credit facilities, and cash from operations.
We believe that these sources are sufficient to fund the current requirements of working capital, capital expenditures, and other financial commitments for the next twelve months.
However, we periodically consider various financing alternatives and may, from time to time, seek to take advantage of favorable interest rate environments or other market conditions.
As of December 31, 2016, cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments held in the United States and outside the United States were $214.1 million and $1,057.0 million, respectively.
We believe that cash held in the United States, in addition to amounts available under credit facilities and cash from operations, are sufficient to fund our United States operating requirements for the next twelve months.
Cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments held outside the United States, the majority of which relates to undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, which are considered by us to be indefinitely reinvested, have historically been used to fund international operations and acquire businesses and assets outside of the United States.
We consider making short-term loans of cash held outside the United States to the United States from time to time based on facts and circumstances.
The permanent repatriations of cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments held outside the United States are subject to restrictions in certain jurisdictions, and may be subject to withholding and other taxes.
The potential tax liability related to any repatriation would be dependent on the facts and circumstances that exist at the time such repatriation is made and the complexities of the tax laws of the United States and the respective foreign jurisdictions.On November 26, 2016, we entered into an agreement and plan of merger to acquire Valtech for approximately $340.0 million, subject to certain adjustments, in stock and cash to be paid at closing, with the potential for up to $350.0 million in additional pre-specified milestone-driven payments over the next 10 years.
Our acquisition of Valtech closed on January 23, 2017, and we issued an aggregate of approximately 2.8 million shares of our common stock, and paid approximately $84.3 million in cash to holders of Valtech securities.
Prior to the close of the transaction, Valtech spun off its early-stage transseptal mitral valve replacement technology program.
We have an option to acquire that program and its associated intellectual property for approximately $200.0 million, subject to certain adjustments.
For further information, see Note 7 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"In December 2015, we purchased an exclusive option to acquire Harpoon Medical, Inc. ("Harpoon Medical") for up to $250.0 million, depending upon the achievement of certain milestones and regulatory approvals.
In December 2014, we purchased an exclusive option to acquire CardioKinetix, Inc. ("CardioKinetix") for up to $375.0 million, depending upon the achievement of certain milestones and regulatory approvals.
For further information, see Note 6 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"On July 3, 2015, we entered into an agreement and plan of merger to acquire CardiAQ for an aggregate cash purchase price of $350.0 million, subject to certain adjustments, plus an additional $50.0 million if a certain European regulatory approval is obtained within 48 months of the acquisition closing date.
We closed the purchase in August 2015 with available cash on hand in the United States.
For further information, see Note 7 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"We have a Five-Year Credit Agreement ("Credit Agreement") which provides up to an aggregate of $750.0 million in borrowings in multiple currencies.
We may increase the amount available under the Credit Agreement, subject to agreement of the lenders, by up to an additional $250.0 million in the aggregate.
As of December 31, 2016, borrowings of $225.0 million were outstanding under the Credit Agreement, and have been classified as long-term obligations in accordance with the terms of the Credit Agreement.
In October 2013, we issued $600.0 million of 2.875% fixed-rate unsecured senior notes due October 15, 2018.
As of December 31, 2016, the total carrying value of our long-term debt was $822.3 million.
For further information on our long-term debt, see Note 9 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"We periodically repurchase shares of our common stock under share repurchase programs authorized by the Board of Directors.
We consider several factors in determining when to execute share repurchases, including, among other things, expected dilution from stock plans, cash capacity, and the market price of our common stock.
During 2016, under the Board authorized repurchase programs, we repurchased a total of 7.2 million shares at an aggregate cost of $646.5 million, including amounts purchased under accelerated share repurchase agreements, and as of December 31, 2016, we had remaining authority to purchase $1,031.0 million of our common stock.
For further information, see Note 13 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"32Table of ContentsConsolidated Cash Flows - For the twelve months ended December 31, 2016, 2015, and 2014 Net cash flows provided by operating activities of $704.4 million for 2016 increased $154.7 million from 2015 due primarily to (1) improved operating performance and (2) lower supplier payments in 2016 compared to 2015, partially offset by (1) the impact of excess tax benefits from stock plans, primarily due to our increased stock price, and (2) an increase in accounts receivable due to increased sales, primarily in the United States.Net cash flows provided by operating activities of $549.7 million for 2015 decreased $472.6 million from 2014 due primarily to (1) the $750.0 million upfront payment received from Medtronic under a litigation settlement agreement, and (2) a higher bonus payout in 2015 associated with 2014 performance.
These decreases were partially offset by (1) income tax payments of $224.5 million made in 2014 related to the Medtronic settlement, (2) improved operating performance in 2015, and (3) the $50.0 million charitable contribution made in 2014 to the Edwards Lifesciences Foundation.Net cash used in investing activities of $211.7 million in 2016 consisted primarily of capital expenditures of $176.1 million and $41.3 million for the acquisition of intangible assets.Net cash used in investing activities of $316.1 million in 2015 consisted primarily of a $320.1 million net payment associated with the acquisition of CardiAQ, and capital expenditures of $102.7 million, partially offset by net proceeds from investments of $119.6 million.Net cash used in investing activities of $633.0 million in 2014 consisted primarily of net purchases of investments of $527.4 million and capital expenditures of $82.9 million.Net cash used in financing activities of $268.5 million in 2016 consisted primarily of purchases of treasury stock of $662.3 million, partially offset by (1) net proceeds from the issuance of debt of $222.1 million, (2) proceeds from stock plans of $103.3 million, and (3) the excess tax benefit from stock plans of $64.3 million.Net cash used in financing activities of $158.6 million in 2015 consisted primarily of purchases of treasury stock of $280.1 million, partially offset by (1) proceeds from stock plans of $87.2 million, and (2) the excess tax benefit from stock plans of $41.3 million.Net cash used in financing activities of $153.0 million in 2014 consisted primarily of purchases of treasury stock of $300.9 million, partially offset by (1) proceeds from stock plans of $113.3 million, and (2) the excess tax benefit from stock plans of $49.4 million (including the realization of previously unrealized excess tax benefits).33Table of ContentsA summary of all of our contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2016 were as follows (in millions): Payments Due by PeriodContractual ObligationsTotal Less Than1 Year 1-3Years 4-5Years After 5YearsDebt$825.0 $— $825.0 $— $—Operating leases72.6 22.3 24.9 8.8 16.6Interest on debt30.8 16.4 14.4 — —Pension obligations (a)6.1 6.1 — — —Capital commitment obligations (b)0.6 0.3 0.3 — —Purchase and other commitments16.4 13.7 2.7 — —Total contractual cash obligations (c), (d)$951.5 $58.8 $867.3 $8.8 $16.6_______________________________________________________________________________(a)The amount included in "Less Than 1 Year" reflects anticipated contributions to our various pension plans.
Anticipated contributions beyond one year are not determinable.
The total accrued benefit liability for our pension plans recognized as of December 31, 2016 was $50.1 million.
This amount is impacted by, among other items, pension expense funding levels, changes in plan demographics and assumptions, and investment returns on plan assets.
Therefore, we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the amount and period in which the liability might be paid, and did not include this amount in the contractual obligations table.
See Note 12 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements" for further information.
(b)Capital commitment obligations consist primarily of cash that we are obligated to pay to our limited partnership and limited liability corporation investees.
These investees make equity investments in various development stage biopharmaceutical and medical device companies, and it is not certain if and/or when these payments will be made.
(c)As of December 31, 2016, the gross liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest, was $271.0 million.
We have been pursuing an APA between the Switzerland and United States governments for the years 2009 through 2013 covering transfer pricing matters with the possibility of a roll-forward of the results to subsequent years.
These transfer pricing matters are significant to our consolidated financial statements, and the final outcome of the negotiations is uncertain.
Management believes that adequate amounts of tax and related penalty and interest have been provided in income tax expense for any adjustments that may result for our uncertain tax positions.
We are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the amount and period in which the liability might be paid, and did not include this amount in the contractual obligations table.
(d)We acquire assets still in development, enter into research and development arrangements, acquire businesses, and sponsor certain clinical trials that often require milestone, royalty, or other future payments to third-parties, contingent upon the occurrence of certain future events.
In situations where we have no ability to influence the achievement of the milestone or otherwise avoid the payment, we have included those payments in the table above.
However, we have excluded from the table contingent milestone payments and other contingent liabilities for which we cannot reasonably predict future payments or for which we can avoid making payment by unilaterally deciding to stop development of a product or cease progress of a clinical trial.
We estimate that these contingent payments could be up to approximately $510.0 million if all milestones or other contingent obligations were met.
Included in this amount is $350.0 million of contingent obligations related to our acquisition of Valtech, which may be paid through a combination of cash and issuance of common stock.
In addition, the Valtech acquisition closed in January 2017, and the consideration paid included the issuance of approximately 2.8 million shares of our common stock (fair value of $266.5 million) and cash of $84.3 million, which has not been included in the above table.Critical Accounting Policies and EstimatesOur results of operations and financial position are determined based upon the application of our accounting policies, as discussed in the notes to the "Consolidated Financial Statements."
Certain of our accounting policies represent a selection among acceptable alternatives under Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States ("GAAP").
In evaluating our transactions, management assesses all relevant GAAP and chooses the accounting policy that most accurately reflects the nature of the transactions.The application of accounting policies requires the use of judgment and estimates.
These matters that are subject to judgments and estimation are inherently uncertain, and different amounts could be reported using different assumptions and 34Table of Contentsestimates.
Management uses its best estimates and judgments in determining the appropriate amount to reflect in the consolidated financial statements, using historical experience and all available information.
We also use outside experts where appropriate.
We apply estimation methodologies consistently from year to year.We believe the following are the critical accounting policies which could have the most significant effect on our reported results and require subjective or complex judgments by management.Revenue RecognitionWhen we recognize revenue from the sale of our products, we record an estimate of various sales returns and allowances which reduces product sales and accounts receivable.
These adjustments include estimates for rebates, returns, and other sales allowances.
These provisions are estimated based upon historical payment experience, historical relationship to revenues, estimated customer inventory levels, and current contract sales terms with direct and indirect customers.
Product returns are not significant because returns are generally not allowed unless the product is damaged at time of receipt.
If the historical data and inventory estimates used to calculate these provisions do not approximate future activity, our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows could be impacted.In addition, we may allow customers to return previously purchased products for next-generation product offerings.
For these transactions, we defer recognition of revenue on the sale of the earlier generation product based upon an estimate of the amount to be returned when the next-generation products are shipped to the customer.
Uncertain timing of next-generation product approvals, variability in product launch strategies, product recalls, and variation in product utilization all affect the estimates related to sales returns and could cause actual returns to differ from these estimates.Our sales adjustment related to distributor rebates given to our United States distributors represents the difference between our sales price to the distributor (at our distributor "list price") and the negotiated price to be paid by the end-customer.
We validate the distributor rebate accrual quarterly through either a review of the inventory reports obtained from our distributors or an estimate of the distributor's inventory.
This distributor inventory information is used to verify the estimated liability for future distributor rebate claims based on historical rebates and contract rates.
We periodically monitor current pricing trends and distributor inventory levels to ensure the credit for future distributor rebates is fairly stated.Excess and Obsolete InventoryThe valuation of our inventory requires us to estimate excess, obsolete, and expired inventory.
We base our provisions for excess, obsolete, and expired inventory on our estimates of forecasted net sales.
A significant change in the timing or level of demand for our products as compared to forecasted amounts may result in recording additional allowances for excess, obsolete, and expired inventory in the future.
In addition, our industry is characterized by rapid product development and frequent new product introductions.
Uncertain timing of next-generation product approvals, variability in product launch strategies, product recalls, increasing levels of consigned inventory, and variation in product utilization all affect our estimates related to excess, obsolete, and expired inventory.Intangible Assets and Long-lived AssetsWe acquire intangible assets in connection with business combinations and asset purchases.
The acquired intangible assets are recorded at fair value, which is determined based on a discounted cash flow analysis.
The determination of fair value requires significant estimates, including, but not limited to, the amount and timing of projected future cash flows, the discount rate used to discount those cash flows, the assessment of the asset's life cycle, including the timing and expected costs to complete in-process projects, and the consideration of legal, technical, regulatory, economic, and competitive risks.IPR&D acquired in business combinations is reviewed for impairment annually, or whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may be impaired.
Additionally, management reviews the carrying amounts of other intangible and long-lived assets whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of an asset may not be recoverable.
The impairment reviews require significant estimates about fair value, including estimation of future cash flows, selection of an appropriate discount rate, and estimates of long-term growth rates.35Table of ContentsContingent Consideration We record contingent consideration resulting from a business combination at its fair value on the acquisition date.
We determine the fair value of the contingent consideration based primarily on the following factors: •timing and probability of success of clinical events or regulatory approvals;•timing and probability of success of meeting commercial milestones; and•discount rates.On a quarterly basis, we revalue these obligations and record changes in their fair value as an adjustment to earnings.
Changes to contingent consideration obligations can result from adjustments to discount rates, accretion of the discount rates due to the passage of time, changes in our estimates of the likelihood or timing of achieving development or commercial milestones, changes in the probability of certain clinical events, or changes in the assumed probability associated with regulatory approval.
The assumptions related to determining the value of contingent consideration include a significant amount of judgment, and any changes in the underlying estimates could have a material impact on the amount of contingent consideration expense recorded in any given period.Income TaxesThe determination of our provision for income taxes requires significant judgment, the use of estimates, and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws.
Realization of certain deferred tax assets, primarily net operating loss and other carryforwards, is dependent upon generating sufficient taxable income in the appropriate jurisdiction prior to the expiration of the carryforward periods.
Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income in the applicable taxing jurisdictions could affect the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets and could result in an increase in our effective tax rate on future earnings.We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions.
Our income tax returns are periodically audited by domestic and foreign tax authorities.
These audits include questions regarding our tax filing positions, including the timing and amount of deductions and the allocation of income amongst various tax jurisdictions.
We evaluate our tax positions and establish liabilities in accordance with the applicable accounting guidance on uncertainty in income taxes.
Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions, including estimating the ultimate resolution to intercompany pricing controversies between countries when there are numerous possible outcomes.
We review these tax uncertainties quarterly and adjust the liability as events occur that affect potential liabilities for additional taxes, such as the progress of tax audits, lapsing of applicable statutes of limitations, negotiations between tax authorities, identification of new issues, and issuance of new legislation, regulations, or case law.For additional details on our income taxes, see Note 2 and Note 16 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Stock-based CompensationWe measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based awards based on estimated fair values.
Stock-based awards consist of stock options, service-based restricted stock units, market-based restricted stock units, performance-based restricted stock units, and employee stock purchase subscriptions.
The fair value of each option award and employee stock purchase subscription is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option valuation model.
The fair value of market-based restricted stock units is determined using a Monte Carlo simulation model, which uses multiple input variables to determine the probability of satisfying the market condition requirements.
The Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo models require various highly judgmental assumptions, including stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate, and expected option term.
For performance-based restricted stock units, expense is recognized if and when we conclude that it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved, which requires judgment.
Stock-based compensation expense is recorded net of estimated forfeitures.
Judgment is required in estimating the stock awards that will ultimately be forfeited.
If actual results differ significantly from these estimates, stock-based compensation expense and our results of operations would be impacted.New Accounting StandardsInformation regarding new accounting standards is included in Note 2 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"36Table of ContentsItem 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market RiskOur business and financial results are affected by fluctuations in world financial markets, including changes in currency exchange rates and interest rates.
We manage these risks through a combination of normal operating and financing activities and derivative financial instruments.
We do not use derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes.Interest Rate RiskOur exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to our investment portfolio and our long-term debt.
Our investment strategy is focused on preserving capital and supporting our liquidity requirements, while earning a reasonable market return.
We invest in a variety of fixed-rate debt securities, primarily time deposits, commercial paper, U.S. government and agency securities, asset-backed securities, corporate debt securities, and municipal debt securities.
The market value of our investments may decline if current market interest rates rise.
As of December 31, 2016, we had $839.2 million of investments in fixed-rate debt securities which had an average remaining term to maturity of approximately 1.1 years.
Taking into consideration the average maturity of our fixed-rate debt securities, a hypothetical 0.5% to 1.0% absolute increase in interest rates at December 31, 2016 would have resulted in a $4.8 million to $9.5 million decrease in the fair value of these investments.
Such a decrease would only result in a realized loss if we choose or are forced to sell the investments before the scheduled maturity, which we currently do not anticipate.We are also exposed to interest rate risk on our debt obligations.
As of December 31, 2016, we had $600.0 million of Notes outstanding that carry a fixed rate, and also had available a $750.0 million Credit Agreement that carries a variable interest rate based on the London interbank offered rate ("LIBOR").
As of December 31, 2016, borrowings of $225.0 million were outstanding under the Credit Agreement.
To diversify our interest rate risk, we entered into interest rate swaps with an aggregate notional amount of $300.0 million.
The critical terms of the swaps match the critical terms of $300.0 million of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes, effectively converting that portion of the fixed-rate issue to a floating variable rate based on a 6-month LIBOR benchmark.
Based on our year end 2016 variable debt levels, a hypothetical 1.0% absolute increase in our floating market interest rates would increase our interest expense by approximately $5.3 million, most of which would be offset by increased returns on our short-term investments.
The impact on net interest would be immaterial to our financial condition and results of operations.
As of December 31, 2016, a hypothetical 1.0% absolute increase in market interest rates would decrease the fair value of the fixed-rate debt by approximately $10.4 million.
This hypothetical change in interest rates would not impact the interest expense on the fixed-rate debt.For more information related to outstanding debt obligations, see Note 9 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Currency RiskWe are exposed to foreign currency risks that arise from normal business operations.
These risks include the translation of local currency balances and results of our non-United States subsidiaries into United States dollars, currency gains and losses related to intercompany and third-party transactions denominated in currencies other than a location's functional currency, and currency gains and losses associated with intercompany loans.
Our principal currency exposures relate to the Euro and the Japanese yen.
Our objective is to minimize the volatility of our exposure to these risks through a combination of normal operating and financing activities and the use of derivative financial instruments in the form of foreign currency forward exchange contracts and foreign currency options contracts.
The total notional amount of our derivative financial instruments entered into for foreign currency management purposes at December 31, 2016 was $949.7 million.
A hypothetical 10% increase/decrease in the value of the United States dollar against all hedged currencies would increase/decrease the fair value of these derivative contracts by $66.0 million.
Any gains or losses on the fair value of derivative contracts would generally be offset by gains and losses on the underlying transactions, so the net impact would not be significant to our financial condition or results of operations.For more information related to outstanding foreign exchange contracts, see Note 2 and Note 11 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Credit RiskDerivative financial instruments involve credit risk in the event the financial institution counterparty should default.
It is our policy to execute such instruments with major financial institutions that we believe to be creditworthy.
At December 31, 2016, all derivative financial instruments were with bank counterparties assigned investment grade ratings by national rating agencies.
We further diversify our derivative financial instruments among counterparties to minimize exposure to any one of 37Table of Contentsthese entities.
We have not experienced a counterparty default and do not anticipate any non-performance by our current derivative counterparties.Concentrations of RiskWe invest excess cash in a variety of fixed-rate debt securities, and diversify the investments between financial institutions.
Our investment policy limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer.In the normal course of business, we provide credit to customers in the health care industry, perform credit evaluations of these customers, and maintain allowances for potential credit losses, which have historically been adequate compared to actual losses.
In 2016, we had no customers that represented 10% or more of our total net sales or accounts receivable, net.Investment RiskWe are exposed to investment risks related to changes in the underlying financial condition and credit capacity of certain of our investments.
As of December 31, 2016, we had $839.2 million of investments in fixed-rate debt securities of various companies, of which $498.2 million were long-term.
In addition, we had $33.9 million of investments in equity instruments of public and private companies.
Should these companies experience a decline in financial condition or credit capacity, or fail to meet certain development milestones, a decline in the investments' values may occur, resulting in unrealized or realized losses.38Table of Contents
