Item 7.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of OperationsThe following discussion and analysis presents the factors that had a material effect on our results of operations during the two years ended December 31, 2019.
Also discussed is our financial position as of December 31, 2019.
You should read this discussion in conjunction with the historical consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. For a discussion related to the results of operations for 2018 compared to 2017, refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our 2018 Annual Report on Form 10–K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 15, 2019.
OverviewWe are the global leader in patient-focused medical innovations for structural heart disease, as well as critical care and surgical monitoring.
Driven by a passion to help patients, we partner with the world's leading clinicians and researchers and invest in research and development to transform care for those impacted by structural heart disease or who require hemodynamic monitoring during surgery or in intensive care.
We conduct operations worldwide and are managed in the following geographical regions: United States, Europe, Japan, and Rest of World.
Our products are categorized into the following main areas: Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement ("TAVR"), Transcatheter Mitral and Tricuspid Therapies ("TMTT"), Surgical Structural Heart ("Surgical"), and Critical Care.
Prior to 2019, TMTT and TAVR had been reported together.
Therefore, prior periods have been presented to conform with the updated product categories.
23Table of ContentsFinancial HighlightsOur sales growth was driven by our TAVR products, primarily the Edwards SAPIEN 3 transcatheter heart valve and the Edwards SAPIEN 3 Ultra System.
Our 2018 Surgical sales in the United States were reduced by a $82.5 million sales return reserve related to our conversion to a consignment inventory model.
Our gross profit increase was driven by our sales performance noted above and was positively impacted by an improved product mix, led by TAVR products.
Partially offsetting this increase was a charge of $73.1 million recorded in 2019, primarily comprised of the write off of inventory related to strategic decisions regarding our TAVR portfolio, including the decision to discontinue our CENTERA program.
The increase in our net income and diluted earnings per share in 2019 was primarily driven by the aforementioned sales growth, partially offset by a 2018 tax benefit and the charge in 2019 related to strategic decisions regarding our TAVR portfolio.
Healthcare Environment, Opportunities, and ChallengesThe medical technology industry is highly competitive and continues to evolve.
Our success is measured both by the development of innovative products and the value we bring to our stakeholders.
We are committed to developing new technologies and providing innovative patient care, and we are committed to defending our intellectual property in support of those developments.
In 2019, we invested 17.3% of our net sales in research and development.
The following is a summary of important developments during 2019:•we reached an agreement with Boston Scientific Corporation ("Boston Scientific") in January 2019 to settle all outstanding patent disputes for a one-time payment to Boston Scientific of $180.0 million;•we completed the acquisition of CAS Medical Systems, Inc. ("CASMED").
CASMED is a medical technology company dedicated to noninvasive monitoring of tissue oxygenation in the brain;•we received CE Mark for the Edwards PASCAL transcatheter valve repair system;•we received FDA approval to expand use of the Edwards SAPIEN and SAPIEN 3 Ultra transcatheter heart valve systems to the treatment of severe, symptomatic aortic stenosis patients who are determined to be at low risk of open-heart surgery;•we received CE Mark to expand use of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 transcatheter heart valve for the treatment of patients diagnosed with aortic stenosis who are at low risk for open-heart surgery; and24Table of Contents•we received FDA approval for an Early Feasibility Study to evaluate the safety and function of the Edwards EVOQUE tricuspid valve replacement system.We are dedicated to generating robust clinical, economic, and quality of life evidence increasingly expected by patients, clinicians, and payors in the current healthcare environment, with the goal of encouraging the adoption of innovative new medical therapies that demonstrate superior outcomes.Results of OperationsNet Sales by Major Regions(dollars in millions) Year Ended December 31, Change 2019 2018 $ %United States$2,532.7 $2,055.3 $477.4 23.2%Europe941.2 885.1 56.1 6.4%Japan444.7 396.8 47.9 12.1%Rest of World429.4 385.6 43.8 11.3%International1,815.3 1,667.5 147.8 8.9%Total net sales$4,348.0 $3,722.8 $625.2 16.8%International net sales include the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
The impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations on net sales is not necessarily indicative of the impact on net income due to the corresponding effect of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations on international manufacturing and operating costs, and our hedging activities.
For more information, see "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
"Net Sales by Product Group(dollars in millions) Year Ended December 31, Change 2019 2018 $ %Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement$2,737.9 $2,283.8 $454.1 19.9%Transcatheter Mitral and Tricuspid Therapies28.2 2.9 25.3 NMSurgical Heart Valve Therapy841.7 761.6 80.1 10.5%Critical Care740.2 674.5 65.7 9.7%Total net sales$4,348.0 $3,722.8 $625.2 16.8%
 NM - Not meaningful25Table of ContentsTranscatheter Aortic Valve ReplacementThe increase in net sales of TAVR products was due primarily to:•higher sales of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 valve, particularly in the United States, driven by strong therapy adoption; and•higher sales of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 Ultra System following its regulatory approval in Europe (November 2018) and the United States (December 2018);partially offset by:•foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which decreased net sales by $32.7 million, due primarily to the weakening of the Euro against the United States dollar.The March 2019 results of the PARTNER 3 Trial demonstrated superiority of SAPIEN 3 TAVR over surgery in the low risk patient population.
In August 2019, we received FDA approval to expand use of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 and SAPIEN 3 Ultra transcatheter heart valve systems to the treatment of severe, symptomatic aortic stenosis patients who are determined to be at low risk of open-heart surgery.
Given the approval for patients at low surgical risk and the continued excellence and versatility of our balloon expandable platform, we decided to discontinue the CENTERA program.
While the CENTERA valve has demonstrated excellent clinical outcomes and is performing well for patients, the time and resources required to optimize deliverability and expand the indications to match the SAPIEN 3 valve are significant.
In November 2019, we received CE Mark to expand use of the Edwards SAPIEN 3 transcatheter heart valve for the treatment of patients diagnosed with aortic stenosis who are at low risk for open-heart surgery.26Table of ContentsTranscatheter Mitral and Tricuspid TherapiesThe increase in net sales of TMTT products was due primarily to sales of the Edwards PASCAL transcatheter valve repair system in Europe, which received CE Mark in February 2019.In mitral repair, we continue to enroll our CLASP IID U.S. pivotal trial to study PASCAL in primary, or degenerative, mitral valve disease.
We also have initiated enrollment in our CLASP IIF pivotal trial for patients with secondary, or functional, mitral valve disease.
In September 2019, we received FDA approval for our CLASP IITR pivotal trial to study PASCAL in patients with symptomatic severe tricuspid regurgitation.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we received FDA approval for an Early Feasibility Study to evaluate the safety and function of the Edwards EVOQUE tricuspid valve replacement system.Surgical Structural HeartThe increase in net sales of Surgical products was due primarily to:•sales return reserves in 2018 of $82.5 million in the United States related to our conversion to a consignment inventory model; and27Table of Contents•increased sales of aortic tissue valves in Japan, Europe and the United States, primarily the INSPIRIS RESILIA aortic valve;partially offset by:•foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which decreased net sales by $14.5 million, due primarily to the weakening of the Euro against the United States dollar.At the end of 2019, we received European regulatory approval for HARPOON Beating Heart Mitral Valve Repair System, and are in the process of beginning our commercial launch.
HARPOON offers the potential for earlier treatment of degenerative mitral valve disease, with faster recovery and more consistent outcomes for surgical patients.
Critical Care2019 Compared with 2018 The increase in net sales of Critical Care products was driven by our HemoSphere advanced monitoring platform, primarily in the United States, partially offset by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which decreased net sales by $9.1 million, due primarily to the weakening of the Euro and various other currencies against the United States dollar.On April 18, 2019, we completed the acquisition of CASMED, a medical technology company dedicated to noninvasive monitoring of tissue oxygenation in the brain.
Our Critical Care sales for 2019 included $16.8 million related to CASMED.We received FDA clearance in the third quarter of 2019 to use FORE-SIGHT, our cerebral oximetry technology, on our Hemosphere platform, and have initiated the commercial launch.28Table of ContentsGross ProfitThe decrease in gross profit as a percentage of net sales in 2019 compared to 2018 was driven by (1) a charge of $73.1 million related to strategic decisions regarding our transcatheter aortic valve portfolio, including the decision to discontinue our CENTERA program (for further information see the "Financial Highlights" section above), (2) the impact of multiple investments in our operations, including an increase in costs to improve our manufacturing processes and (3) spending in support of the new European device regulations.
This decrease was partially offset by a 1.5 percentage point increase due to the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, including the settlement of foreign currency hedging contracts.Selling, General, and Administrative ("SG&A") ExpensesThe increase in SG&A expenses in 2019 compared to 2018 was due primarily to higher transcatheter structural heart field personnel-related costs, primarily in the United States and Europe.
These increases were partially offset by the impact of foreign currency, which decreased expenses by $16.7 million primarily due to the weakening of the Euro against the United States dollar.
The decrease in SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales was primarily due to leverage from our higher sales performance.29Table of ContentsResearch and Development ("R&D") ExpensesThe increase in R&D expenses in 2019 compared to 2018 was due primarily to investments in our transcatheter structural heart programs, including generating clinical evidence.
Intellectual Property Litigation Expenses (Income), netWe incurred intellectual property litigation expenses, including settlements and external legal costs, of $33.4 million and $214.0 million during 2019 and 2018, respectively.
In January 2019, we reached an agreement with Boston Scientific to settle all outstanding patent disputes for a one-time payment to Boston Scientific of $180.0 million, which was included as an expense in 2018.
The settlement covers alleged past damages and no further royalties will be owed by either party.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration Liabilities, netThe change in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities resulted in income of $6.1 million and $5.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The income was due primarily to longer product development timelines, which reduced the probability of milestone achievements.
The income was net of expenses associated with changes in the fair value of the liabilities associated with adjustments to discount rates, accretion of interest due to the passage of time, and the 2018 achievement by Valtech Cardio Ltd. of a regulatory milestone.
For further information, see Note 11 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Special Charges, netFor information on special charges, see Note 4 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Interest ExpenseInterest expense was $20.7 million and $29.9 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The decrease in interest expense resulted primarily from a lower average debt balance.
Interest IncomeInterest income was $32.2 million and $32.0 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The increase in interest income resulted primarily from higher average interest rates, partially offset by a lower average investment balance.
30Table of ContentsOther (Income) Expense, net(in millions) Years Ended December 31, 2019 2018Foreign exchange gains, net$(5.9) $(6.7)(Gain) loss on investments(0.5) 1.7Non-service cost components of net periodic pension benefit cost (credit)0.2 (0.1)Other(2.0) 1.1Total other (income) expense, net$(8.2) $(4.0)The net foreign exchange gains relate to the foreign currency fluctuations in our global trade and intercompany receivable and payable balances, offset by the gains and losses on derivative instruments intended as an economic hedge of those exposures.The (gain) loss on investments represents our net share of gains and losses in investments accounted for under the equity method, and realized gains and losses on investments in equity securities.
The non-service cost components of net periodic pension benefit cost (credit) includes the costs of our defined benefit plans that are not attributed to services rendered by eligible employees during the year, such as interest costs, expected return on plan assets, and amortization of actuarial gains or losses.
Certain costs associated with realignments, including settlements and curtailments, have been included as a component of "Special (Gains) Charges, net."
For further information, see Notes 4 and 13 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Provision for Income Taxes Year Ended December 31, Change 2019 2018 $ %Provision for income taxes119.6 39.2 80.4 205.1%Effective tax rate10.3% 5.1%
 Our effective income tax rate in 2019 and 2018 was 10.3% and 5.1%, respectively.
Our effective tax rate for 2019 increased in comparison to 2018 primarily because of the increase in the U.S. tax on global intangible low-taxed income that became effective with the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the "2017 Act"), and the tax benefit in 2018 from audit settlements.
In 2019, the difference between our 10.3% effective tax rate and the Federal statutory rate of 21% was primarily due to the foreign tax rate differential on foreign operations, the recognition of excess tax benefits on stock-based compensation, and Federal and California research and development credits.
As of December 31, 2019, gross uncertain tax positions were $203.1 million.
We estimate that these liabilities would be reduced by $50.1 million from offsetting tax benefits associated with the correlative effects of potential transfer pricing adjustments, state income taxes, and timing adjustments.
The net amount of $153.0 million, if not required, would favorably affect our effective tax rate.
We strive to resolve open matters with each tax authority at the examination level and could reach agreement with a tax authority at any time.
While we have accrued for matters we believe are more likely than not to require settlement, the final outcome with a tax authority may result in a tax liability that is more or less than that reflected in the consolidated financial statements.
Furthermore, we may later decide to challenge any assessments, if made, and may exercise our right to appeal.
The uncertain tax positions are reviewed quarterly and adjusted as events occur that affect potential liabilities for additional taxes, such as lapsing of applicable statutes of limitations, proposed assessments by tax authorities, negotiations between tax authorities, identification of new issues, and issuance of new legislation, regulations, or case law.
We believe that adequate amounts of tax and related penalty and interest have been provided in income tax expense for any adjustments that may result from our uncertain tax positions.
At December 31, 2019, all material state, local, and foreign income tax matters have been concluded for years through 2008.
During 2018, we signed agreements with the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") to settle tax years 2009 through 2014, 31Table of Contentsincluding transfer pricing matters and the tax treatment of a portion of a litigation settlement payment received in 2014.
The IRS began its examination of the 2015 and 2016 tax years during the fourth quarter of 2018 and its examination of the 2017 tax year during the first quarter of 2019.During 2018, we executed an Advance Pricing Agreement ("APA") between the United States and Switzerland governments for tax years 2009 through 2020 covering various transfer pricing matters and we have updated our transfer pricing policies accordingly.
Certain intercompany transactions covering tax years 2015 through 2019 were not resolved and those related tax positions remain uncertain.
These transfer pricing matters may be significant to our consolidated financial statements.
Based upon the information currently available and numerous possible outcomes, we cannot reasonably estimate what, if any, changes in our existing uncertain tax positions may occur in the next 12 months and, therefore, have recorded the gross uncertain tax positions as a long-term liability.
In addition, we executed other APAs as follows: during 2017, an APA between the United States and Japan covering tax years 2015 through 2019; and during 2018, APAs between Japan and Singapore and between Switzerland and Japan covering tax years 2015 through 2019.
We are evaluating filing to renew some or all of these APAs for the years 2020 and forward.
The execution of some or all of these APAs depends on a number of variables outside of our control.
We have received tax incentives in certain non-U.S. tax jurisdictions, the primary benefit for which will expire in 2029.
The tax reductions as compared to the local statutory rates were $157.6 million ($0.75 per diluted share) and $144.9 million ($0.70 per diluted share) for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital ResourcesOur sources of cash liquidity include cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, amounts available under credit facilities, and cash from operations.
We believe that these sources are sufficient to fund the current requirements of working capital, capital expenditures, and other financial commitments for the next twelve months from the financial statement issuance date.
However, we periodically consider various financing alternatives and may, from time to time, seek to take advantage of favorable interest rate environments or other market conditions.
The 2017 Act, which was signed into law on December 22, 2017, included extensive changes to the international tax regime.
The 2017 Act required a deemed repatriation of post-1986 undistributed foreign earnings and profits.
The deemed repatriation resulted in a $263.9 million tax obligation as of December 31, 2019.
The one-time transition tax liability, as adjusted, is payable in six remaining annual installments, as outlined in the contractual obligations table below.
See Note 17 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information about the one-time transition tax.
As of December 31, 2019, cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments held in the United States and outside the United States were $909.8 million and $607.1 million, respectively.
During 2019, we repatriated cash and notes receivable of $1.2 billion.
We assert that $1.1 billion of our foreign earnings continue to be permanently reinvested and our intent is to repatriate $140.7 million of our foreign earnings as of December 31, 2019.
On April 18, 2019, we acquired CASMED for an aggregate cash purchase price of $2.45 per share of common stock, or$100.8 million.
For more information, see Note 8 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Certain of our business acquisitions involve contingent consideration arrangements.
Payment of additional consideration in the future may be required, contingent upon the acquired company reaching certain performance milestones, such as attaining specified revenue levels, or obtaining regulatory approvals.
For further information, see Note 8 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"We have a Five-Year Credit Agreement ("the Credit Agreement") which matures on April 28, 2023.
The Credit Agreement provides up to an aggregate of $750.0 million in borrowings in multiple currencies.
Subject to certain terms and conditions, we may increase the amount available under the Credit Agreement by up to an additional $250.0 million in the aggregate.
As of December 31, 2019, there were no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement is unsecured and contains various financial and other covenants, including a maximum leverage ratio, as defined in the Credit Agreement.
The Company was in compliance with all covenants at December 31, 2019.In June 2018, we issued $600.0 million of 4.3% fixed-rate unsecured senior notes (the "2018 Notes") due June 15, 2028.
As of December 31, 2019, the total carrying value of our 2018 Notes was $594.4 million.
For further information on our debt, see Note 10 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements."
32Table of ContentsWe reached an agreement with Boston Scientific to settle all outstanding patent disputes for a one-time payment to Boston Scientific of $180.0 million, which was paid in January 2019.
From time to time, we repurchase shares of our common stock under share repurchase programs authorized by the Board of Directors.
We consider several factors in determining when to execute share repurchases, including, among other things, expected dilution from stock plans, cash capacity, and the market price of our common stock.
During 2019, under the Board authorized repurchase programs, we repurchased a total of 1.4 million shares at an aggregate cost of $255.0 million, and as of December 31, 2019, we had remaining authority to purchase $1.2 billion of our common stock.
For further information, see Note 14 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Consolidated Cash Flows - For the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 Net cash flows provided by operating activities of $1.2 billion for 2019 increased $252.6 million from 2018 due primarily to (1) improved operating performance in 2019, (2) higher tax payments in 2018 related to an audit settlement, and (3) a higher bonus payout in 2018 associated with 2017 performance, partially offset by (1) a payment of $180.0 million in 2019 for a litigation settlement and (2) higher working capital needs in 2019.Net cash used in investing activities of $595.8 million in 2019 consisted primarily of (1) capital expenditures of $254.4 million, (2) net purchases of investments of $158.2 million, (3) a $100.2 million net cash payment associated with the acquisition of CASMED, (4) a $35.0 million payment for an option to acquire a company, and (5) a $24.0 million payment to acquire certain early-stage transcatheter intellectual property and associated clinical and regulatory experience.Net cash provided by investing activities of $76.7 million in 2018 consisted primarily of net proceeds from investments of $342.0 million, partially offset by capital expenditures of $238.7 million.We currently anticipate making capital expenditures of approximately $400 million in 2020 as we continue to invest in our operations.Net cash used in financing activities of $115.6 million in 2019 consisted primarily of purchases of treasury stock of $263.3 million, partially offset by proceeds from stock plans of $160.5 million.Net cash used in financing activities of $1.1 billion in 2018 consisted primarily of purchases of treasury stock of $795.5 million and net debt repayments of $437.3 million, partially offset by proceeds from stock plans of $147.0 million.Consolidated Cash Flows - For the twelve months ended December 31, 2018 and 2017 For a discussion related to our consolidated cash flows for 2018 compared to 2017, refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our 2018 Annual Report on Form 10–K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 15, 2019.
33Table of ContentsContractual ObligationsA summary of all of our contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2019 is as follows (in millions): Payments Due by PeriodContractual ObligationsTotal Less Than1 Year 1-3Years 4-5Years After 5YearsDebt$600.0 $— $— $— $600.0Operating leases91.8 27.4 34.2 15.7 14.5Interest on debt164.3 19.9 39.8 38.5 66.1Transition tax on unremitted foreign earnings and profits (a)263.9 25.1 50.3 110.0 78.5Pension obligations (b)1.9 1.9 — — —Purchase and other commitments (c)43.6 28.0 12.1 1.3 2.2Total contractual cash obligations (d), (e)$1,165.5 $102.3 $136.4 $165.5 $761.3_______________________________________________________________________________(a) As of December 31, 2019, we had recorded $263.9 million of income tax liabilities related to the one-time transition tax that resulted from the enactment of the 2017 Act.
The transition tax is due in eight annual installments, with the first annual installment paid in 2018 and the second annual installment paid in 2019.
The remaining installment amounts will be equal to 8% of the total liability, payable in fiscal years 2020 through 2022, 15% in fiscal year 2023, 20% in fiscal year 2024, and 25% in fiscal year 2025.
See Note 17 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information about the one-time transition tax.
(b)The amount included in "Less Than 1 Year" reflects anticipated contributions to our various pension plans.
Anticipated contributions beyond one year are not determinable.
The total accrued benefit liability for our pension plans recognized as of December 31, 2019 was $42.0 million.
This amount is impacted by, among other items, pension expense funding levels, changes in plan demographics and assumptions, and investment returns on plan assets.
Therefore, we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the amount and period in which the liability might be paid, and did not include this amount in the contractual obligations table.
See Note 13 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements" for further information.
(c)For certain purchase and other commitments, such as commitments to fund equity method or other investments, the timing of the payment may not be certain.
In these cases, the maturity dates in the table reflect our best estimates.
(d)As of December 31, 2019, the gross liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest, was $215.9 million and relates primarily to transfer pricing matters.
During 2018, we executed an APA between the United States and Switzerland governments for tax years 2009 through 2020 covering various transfer pricing matters and we have updated our transfer pricing policies accordingly.
Certain intercompany transactions covering tax years 2015 through 2019 were not resolved and those related tax positions remain uncertain.
These transfer pricing matters may be significant to our consolidated financial statements, and the final outcome of the negotiations is uncertain.
Management believes that adequate amounts of tax and related penalty and interest have been provided in income tax expense for any adjustments that may result for our uncertain tax positions.
We are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the amount and period in which the liability might be paid, and did not include this amount in the contractual obligations table.
(e)We acquire assets still in development, enter into research and development arrangements, acquire businesses, and sponsor certain clinical trials that often require milestone, royalty, or other future payments to third-parties, contingent upon the occurrence of certain future events.
In situations where we have no ability to influence the achievement of the milestone or otherwise avoid the payment, we have included those payments in the table above.
However, we have excluded from the table contingent milestone payments and other contingent liabilities for which we cannot reasonably predict future payments or for which we can avoid making payment by unilaterally deciding to stop development of a product or cease progress of a clinical trial.
We estimate that these contingent payments could be up to $565.0 million if all milestones or other contingent obligations are met.
This amount includes certain milestone-based contingent obligations that may be paid through a combination of cash and issuance of common stock.
Critical Accounting Policies and EstimatesOur results of operations and financial position are determined based upon the application of our accounting policies, as discussed in the notes to the "Consolidated Financial Statements."
Certain of our accounting policies represent a selection 34Table of Contentsamong acceptable alternatives under GAAP.
In evaluating our transactions, management assesses all relevant GAAP and chooses the accounting policy that most accurately reflects the nature of the transactions.The application of accounting policies requires the use of judgment and estimates.
These matters that are subject to judgments and estimation are inherently uncertain, and different amounts could be reported using different assumptions and estimates.
Management uses its best estimates and judgments in determining the appropriate amount to reflect in the consolidated financial statements, using historical experience and all available information.
We also use outside experts where appropriate.
We apply estimation methodologies consistently from year to year.We believe the following are the critical accounting policies which could have the most significant effect on our reported results and require subjective or complex judgments by management.Revenue RecognitionWhen we recognize revenue from the sale of our products, the amount of consideration we ultimately receive varies depending upon the return terms, sales rebates, discounts, and other incentives that we may offer, which are accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the amount of revenue to recognize.
The estimate of variable consideration requires significant judgment.
We include estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved.
The estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely upon an assessment of historical payment experience, historical relationship to revenues, estimated customer inventory levels, and current contract sales terms with direct and indirect customers.
Product returns are typically not significant because returns are generally not allowed unless the product is damaged at time of receipt.
If the historical data and inventory estimates used to calculate the variable consideration do not approximate future activity, our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows could be impacted.In addition, in limited circumstances, we may allow customers to return previously purchased products, such as for next-generation product offerings.
For these transactions, we defer recognition of revenue on the sale of the earlier generation product based upon an estimate of the amount of product to be returned when the next-generation products are shipped to the customer.
Uncertain timing of next-generation product approvals, variability in product launch strategies, product recalls, and variation in product utilization all affect the estimates related to sales returns and could cause actual returns to differ from these estimates.Our sales adjustment related to distributor rebates given to our United States distributors represents the difference between our sales price to the distributor and the negotiated price to be paid by the end-customer.
We validate the distributor rebate accrual quarterly through either a review of the inventory reports obtained from our distributors or an estimate of the distributor's inventory.
This distributor inventory information is used to verify the estimated liability for future distributor rebate claims based on historical rebates and contract rates.
We periodically monitor current pricing trends and distributor inventory levels to ensure the credit for future distributor rebates is fairly stated.Excess and Obsolete InventoryThe valuation of our inventory requires us to estimate excess, obsolete, and expired inventory.
We base our provisions for excess, obsolete, and expired inventory on our estimates of forecasted net sales.
A significant change in the timing or level of demand for our products as compared to forecasted amounts may result in recording additional allowances for excess, obsolete, and expired inventory in the future.
In addition, our industry is characterized by rapid product development and frequent new product introductions.
Uncertain timing of next-generation product approvals, variability in product launch strategies, product recalls, increasing levels of consigned inventory, and variation in product utilization all affect our estimates related to excess, obsolete, and expired inventory.Intangible Assets and Long-lived AssetsWe acquire intangible assets in connection with business combinations and asset purchases.
The acquired intangible assets are recorded at fair value, which is determined based on a discounted cash flow analysis.
The determination of fair value requires significant estimates, including, but not limited to, the amount and timing of projected future cash flows, the discount rate used to discount those cash flows, the assessment of the asset's life cycle, including the timing and expected costs to complete in-process projects, and the consideration of legal, technical, regulatory, economic, and competitive risks.35Table of ContentsIn-process research and development assets acquired in business combinations is reviewed for impairment annually, or whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may be impaired.
Additionally, management reviews the carrying amounts of other intangible and long-lived assets whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of an asset may not be recoverable.
The impairment reviews require significant estimates about fair value, including estimation of future cash flows, selection of an appropriate discount rate, and estimates of long-term growth rates.Contingent Consideration We record contingent consideration resulting from a business combination at its fair value on the acquisition date.
We determine the fair value of the contingent consideration based primarily on the following factors: •discount rates used to present value the projected cash flows;•the probability of success of clinical events and regulatory approvals, and/or meeting commercial milestones; •projected payment dates; and•volatility of future revenue.On a quarterly basis, we revalue these obligations and record changes in their fair value as an adjustment to earnings.
Changes to contingent consideration obligations can result from adjustments to discount rates, accretion of the discount rates due to the passage of time, changes in our estimates of the likelihood or timing of achieving development or commercial milestones, changes in the probability of certain clinical events, or changes in the assumed probability associated with regulatory approval.
The assumptions related to determining the value of contingent consideration include a significant amount of judgment, and any changes in the underlying estimates could have a material impact on the amount of contingent consideration expense recorded in any given period.Income TaxesThe determination of our provision for income taxes requires significant judgment, the use of estimates, and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws.
Realization of certain deferred tax assets, primarily tax credits, net operating loss and other carryforwards, is dependent upon generating sufficient taxable income in the appropriate jurisdiction prior to the expiration of the carryforward periods.
Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income in the applicable taxing jurisdictions could affect the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets and could result in an increase in our effective tax rate on future earnings.We have made an accounting policy election to recognize the U.S. tax effects of global intangible low-taxed income as a component of income tax expense in the period the tax arises.
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions.
Our income tax returns are periodically audited by domestic and foreign tax authorities.
These audits include questions regarding our tax filing positions, including the timing and amount of deductions and the allocation of income amongst various tax jurisdictions.
We evaluate our tax positions and establish liabilities in accordance with the applicable accounting guidance on uncertainty in income taxes.
Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions, including estimating the ultimate resolution to intercompany pricing controversies between countries when there are numerous possible outcomes.
We review these tax uncertainties quarterly and adjust the liability as events occur that affect potential liabilities for additional taxes, such as the progress of tax audits, lapsing of applicable statutes of limitations, negotiations between tax authorities, identification of new issues, and issuance of new legislation, regulations, or case law.For additional details on our income taxes, see Note 2 and Note 17 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Stock-based CompensationWe measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based awards based on estimated fair values.
Stock-based awards consist of stock options, service-based restricted stock units, market-based restricted stock units, performance-based restricted stock units, and employee stock purchase subscriptions.
The fair value of each option award and employee stock 36Table of Contentspurchase subscription is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option valuation model.
The fair value of market-based restricted stock units is determined using a Monte Carlo simulation model, which uses multiple input variables to determine the probability of satisfying the market condition requirements.
The Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo models require various highly judgmental assumptions, including stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate, and expected option term.
For performance-based restricted stock units, expense is recognized if and when we conclude that it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved, which requires judgment.
Stock-based compensation expense is recorded net of estimated forfeitures.
Judgment is required in estimating the stock awards that will ultimately be forfeited.
If actual results differ significantly from these estimates, stock-based compensation expense and our results of operations would be impacted.New Accounting StandardsInformation regarding new accounting standards is included in Note 2 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market RiskOur business and financial results are affected by fluctuations in world financial markets, including changes in currency exchange rates and interest rates.
We manage these risks through a combination of normal operating and financing activities and derivative financial instruments.
We do not use derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes.Interest Rate RiskOur exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to our investment portfolio and our long-term debt.
Our investment strategy is focused on preserving capital and supporting our liquidity requirements, while earning a reasonable market return.
We invest in a variety of fixed-rate debt securities, primarily time deposits, commercial paper, U.S. and foreign government and agency securities, asset-backed securities, corporate debt securities, and municipal debt securities.
The market value of our investments may decline if current market interest rates rise.
As of December 31, 2019, we had $894.0 million of investments in fixed-rate debt securities which had an average remaining term to maturity of approximately 1.0 years.
Taking into consideration the average maturity of our fixed-rate debt securities, a hypothetical 0.5% to 1.0% absolute increase in interest rates at December 31, 2019 would have resulted in a $4.6 million to $9.2 million decrease in the fair value of these investments.
Such a decrease would only result in a realized loss if we choose or are forced to sell the investments before the scheduled maturity, which we currently do not anticipate.For more information related to investments, see Note 7 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"We are also exposed to interest rate risk on our debt obligations.
As of December 31, 2019, we had $600.0 million of Notes outstanding that carry a fixed rate, and also had available a $750.0 million Credit Agreement that carries a variable interest rate based on the London interbank offered rate ("LIBOR").
As of December 31, 2019, there were no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Agreement.
Based on our December 31, 2019 variable debt levels, a hypothetical 1.0% absolute increase in our floating market interest rates would not have impacted our interest expense since we had no variable debt outstanding during the year.
As of December 31, 2019, a hypothetical 1.0% absolute increase in market interest rates would decrease the fair value of the fixed-rate debt by approximately $44.7 million.
This hypothetical change in interest rates would not impact the interest expense on the fixed-rate debt.For more information related to outstanding debt obligations, see Note 10 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Currency RiskWe are exposed to foreign currency risks that arise from normal business operations.
These risks include the translation of local currency balances and results of our non-United States subsidiaries into United States dollars, currency gains and losses related to intercompany and third-party transactions denominated in currencies other than a location's functional currency, and currency gains and losses associated with intercompany loans.
Our principal currency exposures relate to the Euro and the Japanese yen.
Our objective is to minimize the volatility of our exposure to these risks through a combination of normal operating and financing activities and the use of derivative financial instruments in the form of foreign currency forward exchange contracts and cross currency swap contracts.
The total notional amount of our derivative financial instruments entered into for foreign currency management purposes at December 31, 2019 was $1.6 billion.
A hypothetical 10% increase/decrease in the value of the United States dollar against all hedged currencies would increase/decrease the fair value of these derivative contracts by $117.0 million.
Any gains or losses on the fair value of derivative contracts would generally be offset by gains and losses on the underlying transactions, so the net impact would not be significant to our financial condition or results of operations.37Table of ContentsFor more information related to outstanding foreign exchange contracts, see Note 2 and Note 12 to the "Consolidated Financial Statements.
"Credit RiskDerivative financial instruments involve credit risk in the event the financial institution counterparty should default.
It is our policy to execute such instruments with major financial institutions that we believe to be creditworthy.
At December 31, 2019, all derivative financial instruments were with bank counterparties assigned investment grade ratings by national rating agencies.
We further diversify our derivative financial instruments among counterparties to minimize exposure to any one of these entities.
We have not experienced a counterparty default and do not anticipate any non-performance by our current derivative counterparties.Concentrations of RiskWe invest excess cash in a variety of fixed-rate debt securities, and diversify the investments between financial institutions.
Our investment policy limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer.In the normal course of business, we provide credit to customers in the health care industry, perform credit evaluations of these customers, and maintain allowances for potential credit losses, which have historically been adequate compared to actual losses.
In 2019, we had no customers that represented 10% or more of our total net sales or accounts receivable, net.Investment RiskWe are exposed to investment risks related to changes in the underlying financial condition and credit capacity of certain of our investments.
As of December 31, 2019, we had $894.0 million of investments in fixed-rate debt securities of various companies, of which $556.2 million were long-term.
In addition, we had $29.3 million of investments in equity instruments of public and private companies.
Should these companies experience a decline in financial condition or credit capacity, or fail to meet certain development milestones, a decline in the investments' values may occur, resulting in unrealized or realized losses.38Table of Contents
